---
title: "Aspect Events"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Aspect Events

This is a trick you can use to create the framework of an adventure—you can
even combine this technique with the previous technique to inject events based
on player input.

An aspect event has two components: the event list and the crescendo aspect.
The **event list** is a series of things that will happen, leading up to the
crescendo aspect. Think of the **crescendo aspect** as what will happen if the
players don’t intercede. A good event has three to six aspects plus the
crescendo aspect.

When the adventure starts, check off the first aspect and bring it into the
story. This is the inciting incident, the thing that gets the PCs involved.
It’s an aspect like any other—you and the players can compel it or invoke it
as appropriate. It stays in play until it’s no longer relevant, at which point
you simply cross it off.

Whenever the story suggests that things should move on, or whenever there’s a
lull in the action, check off the next aspect and bring it into the story.
It’s now an aspect that can be invoked or compelled, and it’s a new element to
the story. Keep doing this for as long as you need to. Accelerate the rate at
which you bring in aspects, if the players are getting distracted or not
getting involved, or slow it down if they’re being really proactive.

If the crescendo aspect gets checked off, things have gotten really, really
bad. This usually indicates that the bad guys are on the verge of winning, and
that the players need to step up their game!

If you don’t check off all the aspects by the time the PCs wrap things up,
that’s fine! It just means the PCs were on their game, and that they got to be
awesome and win big. If you check off all the aspects and things go badly for
the PCs, that’s also fine! You can snowball what happened in this story into
the next one, and up the ante a bit.

Here’s an example:

  * <span class="aspect">Explosions and Fire!</span>
  * <span class="aspect">A Rash of Murders</span>
  * <span class="aspect">Citywide Panic</span>
  * <span class="aspect">Under Terrorist Threat</span>
  * <span class="aspect">Three Hours to Detonation</span>
  * <span class="aspect">Smoking Crater</span>

  * [« Pre-Compels as Adventure Design](/fate-system-toolkit/pre-compels-adventure-design)
  * [Power Level »](/fate-system-toolkit/power-level)

