---
title: "Quick Character Creation"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Quick Character Creation

**If you want to skip making a detailed character and just want to play, you can leave most of the character blank and fill in as you play.**

At minimum, you need to have the following filled out to start:

  * High concept aspect
  * Best skill
  * Name

When it comes to your high concept, you can start off vague and refine the
aspect later. <span class="aspect">Guy with Sword</span> is an okay high concept for
this method, and later you might discover something about your character that
puts a spin on it. When that happens, rewrite the aspect to reflect that spin.

You should know your best skill to start—that gives us further ideas about
your character. If you have any other thoughts on skills, either skills you’re
good at or skills you’re bad at, write those down. (Since you don’t normally
write down any skills you have at lower than Average (+1), just make a note on
your sheet about those skills you’re intentionally saying you don’t have.)

And, of course, you need a name! Maybe a first name is all you need for the
moment, or a nickname. (There’s also the trick of giving yourself a name, only
to later reveal that you’ve been hiding, are undercover, or have amnesia, and
write down what your real name is.)

## Starting Play

With this method, you start with 3 refresh, so you’ll start playing with 3
fate points.

After the first session is over, if you’re planning on playing your character
again, you should take time to fill in the rest of the aspects, skills, and
stunts.

## Filling Aspects in Play

Unless you immediately have an idea for your trouble aspect, you’ll fill that
in later. With the other three aspects, since you’re skipping the Phase Trio,
you’ll just make up whatever aspect seems interesting to you at the moment.
Typically you’ll do this when you need an aspect on your character to achieve
something, or you want to turn a situation that’s happening into something
that’s compel-worthy.

As with high concept, don’t stress about getting this aspect dead-on. After
the session’s over, take some time to look over and tweak the aspects you’ve
created on the fly.

## Filling Skills in Play

At any point, if you are using a skill that isn’t on your character sheet, one
of two things happens: you’ll assume the skill is Mediocre (+0), or you’ll
write it down on one of your empty skill slots and roll it at that level. This
choice exists until all of your skill slots are filled in.

If you roll for a skill not on your sheet and choose to go with Mediocre
rather than write it down, you can later fill it in on your sheet as something
higher. For example, you might be called to roll Lore, and choose to roll it
at Mediocre. Later, you might be called to roll it again, and this time you
choose to fill it in at Fair (+2).

Likewise, if you roll well on a skill when you chose to take it at Mediocre,
maybe that’ll inspire you to take that skill later.

Since some skills have secondary benefits, notably adjusting your stress track
and consequences, you can fill those in when you want to declare your
character has such a benefit. Until then, you don’t have those benefits, as
you’re assumed to have that skill at Mediocre.

## Filling Stunts in Play

You get three stunts for free, which you can fill in at any time. You can fill
in other stunts at any time, but you must pay a fate point for each one to do
so. That’s because your refresh tells you how many fate points you start the
game with, so by taking a stunt, you should have started with fewer.

If you’re out of fate points, but want to note down a stunt you have because
you’re suddenly struck with the idea, do so. But your character doesn’t
actually have it until you gain a fate point and spend it.

You’ll also need to reduce your refresh by one for the next session for each
extra stunt you take.

  * [« You’re All Set!](/fate-core/you%E2%80%99re-all-set)
  * [Aspects &amp; Fate Points »](/fate-core/aspects-fate-points)

