---
title: "Stunts"
---
    
Fate Accelerated

#  Stunts

**Stunts** are tricks, maneuvers, or techniques your character has that change how an approach works for your character. Generally this means [you get a bonus in certain situations](../../fate-accelerated/how-do-stuff-outcomes-actions-and-approaches "Outcomes, Actions, & Approaches" ), but sometimes it gives you some other ability or characteristic. A stunt can also reflect specialized, high-quality, or exotic equipment that your character has access to that gives them a frequent edge over other characters.

There’s no definitive list of stunts that you pick from; much like aspects,
everyone composes their own stunts. There are two basic templates to guide you
in composing your stunts, so you do have something to work from.

The first type of stunt gives you a +2 bonus when you use a certain approach
in a certain situation. Use this template:

Because I **[describe some way that you are exceptional, have a cool bit of
gear, or are otherwise awesome]**, I get a +2 when I **[pick one: Carefully,
Cleverly, Flashily, Forcefully, Quickly, Sneakily][pick one: attack, defend,
create advantages, overcome]** when **[describe a circumstance]**.

For example:

>   * Because I am a Smooth Talker, I get a +2 when I Sneakily create
advantages when I’m in conversation with someone.

>   * Because I am a Lover of Puzzles, I get a +2 when I Cleverly overcome
obstacles when I am presented with a puzzle, riddle, or similar conundrum.

>   * Because I am a World-Class Duelist, I get a +2 when I Flashily attack
when engaged in a one-on-one swordfight.

>   * Because I have a Big Kite Shield, I get a +2 when I Forcefully defend
when I use my shield in close combat.

>

Sometimes, if the circumstance is especially restrictive, you can apply the
stunt to both the create an advantage action and the overcome action.

The second type of stunt lets you make something true, do something cool, or
otherwise ignore the usual rules in some way. Use this template:

Because I **[describe some way that you are exceptional, have a cool bit of
gear, or are otherwise awesome]**, once per game session I can **[describe
something cool you can do]**.

For example:

>   * Because I am Well Connected, once per game session I can find a helpful
ally in just the right place.

>   * Because I am Quick on the Draw, once per game session I can choose to go
first in a physical conflict.

>   * Because I can Run Circles Around a Leopard, once per game session I can
show up anywhere I want to, provided I could run there, no matter where I
started.

>

These templates exist to give you an idea of how stunts should be constructed,
but don’t feel constrained to follow them exactly if you have a good idea. If
you’d like to read more about the construction of stunts, see [Skills and
Stunts](../../fate-core/skills-stunts "Skills & Stunts \(in Fate
Core\)" ) in Fate Core.

### Tool for Stunt Inspiration

If you're having trouble coming up with a stunt, give the [Stuntmaker](../../stunt-maker/) a go. It will generate random Fate Core style stunts to
inspire you! (Just be sure to vet them with the table before using them.)

  * [« Aspects &amp; Fate Points](/fate-accelerated/aspects-fate-points)
  * [Getting Better at Doing Stuff: Character Advancement »](/fate-accelerated/getting-better-doing-stuff-character-advancement)

