---
title: "The Phase Trio"
---
    
Fate Core

#  The Phase Trio

**Describe your character’s first adventure. Describe how you’ve crossed paths with two other characters. Write down one aspect for each of these three experiences.**

**Important:** Before moving on to this step, you need to have figured out your [high concept, trouble, and name](../../fate-core/your-character-idea).

The three remaining aspects on your character are made in phases, together
called the phase trio. The first phase is about recent background: something
you did that’s interesting and adventurous. The second and third are about how
the other player characters got involved in that adventure, and how you got
involved in theirs.

This is an opportunity to tell a story about your characters. Each phase will
ask you to write down two things. Use the character creation worksheet (at the
back of this book, or at [FateRPG.com](http://faterpg.com/)) to write down
those details.

  * **First, write a summary of what happened in that phase.** A couple of sentences to a paragraph should suffice—you don’t want to establish too much detail up front, because you might have to adjust details in later phases.
  * **Second, write an aspect that reflects some part of that phase.** The aspect can cover the general vibe from the summary, or it can focus on some piece of it that still resonates with your character in the present day.

### Intro to Choosing Aspects

A lot of character creation focuses on coming up with aspects—some are called
high concepts, some are called troubles, but they basically all work the same
way. Aspects are one of the most important parts of your character, since they
define who she is, and they provide ways for you to generate fate points and
to spend those fate points on bonuses. If you have time, you really might want
to read the [whole section dedicated to aspects](../../fate-core
/aspects-fate-points) before you go through the process of character creation.

In case you’re pressed for time, here are some guidelines for choosing
aspects.

Aspects which don’t help you tell a good story (by giving you success when you
need it and by drawing you into danger and action when the story needs it)
aren’t doing their job. The aspects which push you into conflict—and help you
excel once you’re there—will be among your best and most-used.

Aspects need to be both useful and dangerous—allowing you to help shape the
story and generating lots of fate points—and they should never be boring. The
best aspect suggests both ways to use it and ways it can complicate your
situation. Aspects that cannot be used for either of those are likely to be
dull indeed.

Bottom line: if you want to maximize the power of your aspects, maximize their
interest.

When you’re told you need to come up with an aspect, you might experience
brain freeze. If you feel stumped for decent ideas for aspects, there’s a big
section focusing on several methods for coming up with good aspect ideas in
Aspects and Fate Points.

If your character doesn’t have many connections to the other characters, talk
with the group about aspects that might tie your character in with theirs.
This is the explicit purpose of Phases Two and Three—but that doesn’t mean you
can’t do it elsewhere as well.

If you ultimately can’t break the block by any means, don’t force it—leave it
completely blank. You can always come back and fill out that aspect later, or
let it develop during play—as with the Quick Character Creation rules.

Ultimately, it’s much better to leave an aspect slot blank than to pick one
that isn’t inspiring and evocative to play. If you’re picking aspects you’re
not invested in, they’ll end up being noticeable drags on your fun.

## Phase One: Your Adventure

The first phase is your character’s first true adventure—his first book,
episode, case, movie, whatever—starring him.

You need to think up and write down the basic details of this story for the
phase’s summary. The story doesn’t need to have a lot of detail—in fact, a
pair of sentences works pretty well—because your fellow players will add in
their own details to this past adventure in the next two phases (as you will
to theirs).

If you find yourself stuck, look to your character’s high concept and trouble.
Find a dilemma that has a chance of throwing those ideas into focus. What
problem do you get roped into because of your high concept or trouble? How
does the other aspect help or complicate your life?

Landon gets into a bar fight with some of the Scar Triad. He is robbed of his
sword and beaten severely. His life is saved by a veteran soldier named Old
Finn. Finn helps to heal Landon, clean him up, and enlist him in the town
militia.

### * <span class="aspect">I Owe Old Finn Everything</span>

Ask yourself the following story questions. If you have trouble answering
them, talk to the other players and the GM for help.

  * Something bad happened. What was it? Did it happen to you, to someone you cared about, or to someone that you were coerced into helping?
  * What did you decide to do about the problem? What goal did you pursue?
  * Who stood against you? Did you expect the opposition you got? Did some of it come out of nowhere?
  * Did you win? Did you lose? Either way, what consequences arose from the outcome?

Once you’ve come up with the adventure, write an aspect that relates to some
part of what happened.

**A note on timing:** Because two other characters will be involved in the following phases, this adventure needs to be something that isn’t so early in your character’s life that he hasn’t met the other protagonists yet. If one of you has decided that you recently showed up in the story, then the adventures involving that person happened recently. If some of you have been friends (or old rivals!) for a long time, then those adventures can take place further in the past. Your best bet is to not make these adventures specific in time; you can figure out that part once you know who’s involved in your story.

> Lenny goes through Phase One. He looks at the story questions to help him
figure out the events of the phase, and decides on the following:

>

> The bad thing was that Landon kept getting into scrapes at his local tavern.
He grew up with no sense of discipline or demeanor and constantly picked
fights with people larger and stronger than him.

>

> One thug Landon insulted at the tavern was connected to the Scar Triad, so
some of the thug’s bandit buddies showed up and beat Landon to within an inch
of his life.

>

> His bleeding body was then found by a veteran soldier named Finn who healed
Landon’s wounds and encouraged him to join the town militia where he could
learn some discipline and fight with honor.

>

> Now Lenny has to write down an aspect related to this story. He decides to
take <span class="aspect">I Owe Old Finn Everything</span> as his aspect, because he
wants to keep the connection to Finn in his story and give Amanda a cool NPC
to play.

### Phases &amp; Index Cards

In phase one, you each came up with your own adventure. In phases two and
three, you’re going to trade those stories around as other players’ characters
get involved. Figuring out how your character fits into someone else’s story
can be hard to do if you’ve handed your character phase worksheet to another
player, so we recommend that you use index cards (or whatever scraps of paper
you have).

During the first phase—when you’re writing your adventure down on your
worksheet—take a card and write your character’s name and adventure
description. Then you’ll pass the card around during the second and third
phases so people can contribute to your story. That way, you’ll still have
your worksheet when you’re writing your contributions and aspects, and other
people will know what stories they’re supposed to hook into.

As with the high concept and trouble aspects, this (and the following phases)
are further opportunities to flesh out the setting.

## Phase Two: Crossing Paths

In the next two phases, you’ll tie the group together by having other
characters contribute a minor, supporting role in your adventure, and vice
versa.

Once everyone has their adventure written down (which is where the index card
suggestion comes in really handy), you’re ready for phase two. You can pass to
the left or right, or shuffle the stack and hand them out randomly (trading
with the person to your right until you each have one that isn’t yours).
However you decide to do it, every player should now be holding someone else’s
adventure.

Your character has a supporting role in the story you’re holding, which you
get to come up with right now. Briefly discuss it with the player whose
adventure it is and add a sentence or phrase to the summary to reflect your
character’s supporting role. Supporting roles come in three forms: they
complicate the adventure, solve a situation, or both.

  * **Complicating the adventure:** Your character managed to make some part of the adventure uncertain (possibly because of an issue or trouble aspect). Of course, since that happened in the past, it is known that you got out of it all right (or mostly all right, as indicated by the aspect you take). When describing this, don’t worry about how the situation is resolved—leave that for someone else, or leave it open. Descriptions like “Landon starts trouble when Cynere needs him quiet” or “Zird gets captured by mysterious brigands” are enough to get some ideas flowing.
  * **Solving a situation:** Your character somehow solves a complication that the main character in the adventure had to deal with, or your character aids the main character in the central conflict (which is an opportunity to involve your high concept aspect). When describing this, you don’t have to mention how the situation was created, just how your character takes care of it. Descriptions like “Cynere holds off foes to give Landon time to escape” or “Zird uses his arcane knowledge to ask the ghosts for information” are enough to give us an idea of what happens.
  * **Complicating and solving:** Here, your character either solves one situation but creates another, or creates a situation but later solves a different one. Mash up the two ideas, using the word “later” in between them, such as: “Landon starts a fight with the Scar Triad while Zird is trying to lay low. Later, he helps Zird by fighting off undead while Zird’s casting a spell.”

The default phase trio prioritizes connecting the characters together in a
shared backstory. We like this, because it’s cooperative and gets you talking
to one another. That’s not the only way to do it, though. You could make any
significant trifecta of backstory details into a phase trio. Your past, your
present, and your hope for the future is another set of trio elements.

The idea is to be a bit self-serving here. You want to put a little spotlight
on your character in order to figure out a good aspect from it: something
you’re known for, something you can do, something you own or have, and someone
you have a relationship with (for good or ill).

Finally, write the adventure idea and your character’s contribution down on
your phase worksheet. This is important, because your character gets an aspect
from the supporting role he played. The person whose adventure it is should
also write down the contribution, if there’s room on his sheet.

> Lily has Landon’s starting adventure and needs to decide how she fits into
it.

>

> She decides that Cynere helped solve the situation. After Landon ends up in
the militia, he still has a grudge against the Triad members who ganged up on
him. In fact, they robbed him of his heirloom sword in the process. Hearing
Landon’s tale of woe, Cynere agrees to help steal the sword back.

>

> She takes the aspect <span class="aspect">A Sucker for a Sob Story</span>, to
reflect the reason why she got involved.

Landon gets into a bar fight with some of the Scar Triad. He is robbed of his
sword and beaten severely. His life is saved by a veteran soldier named Old
Finn. Finn helps to heal Landon, clean him up, and enlist him in the town
militia.

### * <span class="aspect">I Owe Old Finn Everything</span>

When Landon tells Cynere his story, she takes pity on him and decides to help
him recover his lost sword.

### * <span class="aspect">A Sucker for a Sob Story</span>

## Phase Three: Crossing Paths Again

Once everyone’s done with phase two, you’ll trade adventures with whatever
method you chose before, so long as everyone has an adventure that isn’t
theirs or the one they just contributed to. Then you’re ready for phase three,
where you’ll contribute to this second adventure and determine your next
aspect. Follow the directions from phase two.

> Lily gets Zird’s starting adventure, a pretty straightforward romp where
Zird battles his Collegia rivals to obtain a magical artifact and return it to
its rightful place.

>

> She decides that she complicates that situation, by wanting the shiny
artifact for herself. Ryan already established that Zird gets the artifact
back to where it belongs, so she only holds it temporarily.

>

> She decides to take I’ve Got Zird’s Back, as a way of reflecting her
willingness to stick her neck out for Zird—the group doesn’t know what he did
to earn such loyalty, but they figure they’ll find out eventually.

Cynere steals Zird’s artifact. Eventually it returns to Zird’s hands and the
two gain a mutual respect for each other.

### * <span class="aspect">I’ve Got Zird’s Back</span>

And with that, you have your five aspects and a good chunk of background!

### Fewer Than Three Players?

The phase trio assumes that you’ll have at least three players. If you have
only two, consider the following ideas:

  * Skip phase three and just make up another aspect, either now or in play.
  * Come up with a third, joint-story together, and write about how you each feature in that one.
  * Have the GM also make a character. The GM won’t actually play this character alongside the PCs, though—it should just be an NPC. Such an NPC can be a great vehicle for kicking off a campaign—if a friend they’re tied to during character creation mysteriously disappears or even dies, that’s instant fuel for drama.

If you only have one player, skip phases two and three, leaving the aspects
blank to be filled in during play.

  * [« Your Character Idea](/fate-core/your-character-idea)
  * [Skills »](/fate-core/skills)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

