---
title: "Skills"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Skills

## Pick and rate your character’s skills.

Once you have mapped out your character’s phases and chosen aspects, it’s time
to pick skills. You’ll find descriptions and details for each skill in the
[Skills and Stunts](../../fate-core/skills-stunts "Skills & Stunts" )
section.

Your skills form a pyramid, with a single skill rated at Great (+4)—which is
referred to as the peak skill—and more skills at each lower rating on the
ladder going down to Average (+1):

  * One Great (+4) skill
  * Two Good (+3) skills
  * Three Fair (+2) skills
  * Four Average (+1) skills

### For Veterans: Why The Pyramid?

If you’ve played _The Dresden Files RPG_, you know that skill columns are used
for that instead of the pyramid.

In this build of Fate, character creation was designed to be as quick and
accessible as possible, so the pyramid is standard. If you want to use the
columns, go ahead—you get 20 skill points.

Skill columns didn’t completely go away. It’s just [reserved for advancement
](../../fate-core/advancement-change).

### The Skill Cap

By default, Great (+4) is the highest rated skill PCs start with. As
characters advance, they can improve beyond this cap, but it’s more difficult
than improving skills rated below the cap (see [Major Milestones](../../fate-core/advancement-change)).

If you’re making a game about superheroes, pandimensional creatures, mythic
gods or other beyond-human characters, feel free to set the tip of the skill
pyramid—and thus the cap—at Superb (+5) or Fantastic (+6).

The number of skills you get should be relative to the size of the skill list.
Our default skill list has 18 skills, and the Great pyramid gives you a rating
in 10 of them, which means every character has some capability in over half of
the total number of things you can do, and there’s room for six PCs to peak
(as in, to choose their three top skills) without overlap. You can tweak this
for individual games, especially if you adjust the skill cap. Just keep in
mind that bigger pyramids mean more overlap between characters, unless your
game has a longer skill list.

Mediocre (+0) is the default for any skill you do not take. Sometimes, a skill
will state that it’s unavailable if a character didn’t take it; in those
cases, it’s not even at Mediocre.

> Ryan knows that Zird’s not like the other PCs in terms of skills, so he
looks to distance Zird from them as much as possible. The group has decided
that Zird’s magic is going to work off his Lore skill, so he’s naturally going
to focus on that.

>

> He takes Lore as Zird’s peak skill, followed by Crafts and Rapport—for a
wizard, Zird considers himself a fairly social sort. Ryan takes Athletics,
Will, and Investigate because he figures Zird will need them in his line of
work, and a smattering of other skills either because neither of his friends
have them, or because he wants a positive score in them when everyone’s
separated. That ends up being Fight, Resources, Contacts, and Notice.

**Note:** a few skills have special benefits, notably those skills that affect the number of [stress boxes and consequences](../../fate-core/stress-consequences "Stress & Consequences" ) you have available. If you know you want a certain number of those, put those skills on the pyramid first.

  * [« The Phase Trio](/fate-core/phase-trio)
  * [Stunts &amp; Refresh »](/fate-core/stunts-refresh)

  *[PC]: Player Character

