---
title: "Swashbuckling Duels"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Swashbuckling Duels

The kind of cinematic, heroic action that typifies swashbuckling stories is
near and dear to Fate Core’s heart—that’s just the nature of the game. But
those climactic one-on-one fights between our hero and a dastardly villain
almost always involve a lot of back-and-forth before one of them lands a blow.
In the meantime, they might trade witty repartee or provocative insults, swing
from chandeliers, leap off balconies, baffle their opponent with their cloak,
or a thousand other things. Look at D’Artagnan and Jussac in The Three
Musketeers, Errol Flynn and Basil Rathbone in the 1938 film The Adventures of
Robin Hood, Cyrano’s poetry-laden duel with Valvert in Rostand’s Cyrano de
Bergerac, or Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader’s duel in The Empire Strikes Back.

The create an advantage action in Fate Core makes it easy to model these sorts
of conflicts, but most players will still gravitate toward the most efficient
means of dispatching the opposition, especially if there aren’t other PCs
around to give them an excuse to create situation aspects. That’s what this
hack does—require players to rely on skills other than Fight in a conflict,
with colorful results.

These one-on-one dueling rules introduce something called the **upper hand**.
Only the duelist with the upper hand can actually use a skill with the attack
action to inflict harm. The other duelist can take any _other _action, but
cannot attack—until _they _get the upper hand, of course.

How does one get the upper hand? By succeeding with style with a skill _other
_than one that deals harm in physical conflicts (Fight or Shoot, or whatever
the equivalent is in your game). As soon as one combatant succeeds with style
with one of these other skills, they get the upper hand. This _replaces _the
action’s usual reward for succeeding with style, such as getting a boost or an
extra free invocation. You get either the upper hand _or_ the usual reward,
but not both.

Use a token of some kind to represent the upper hand. Whatever it is, it
should be something that can easily be handed back and forth, like a coin, a
little plastic cocktail sword, an index card with a hand drawn on it, a
fencing glove—whatever works for your group.

At the beginning of a physical conflict between two (and only two)
participants, determine the turn order, as usual. If this involves a skill
roll, and one of the two succeeds with style, they start the conflict with the
upper hand—they got the jump on the other guy.

After that, the combatants can do any of the following every turn:

  * Attack, if they have the upper hand
  * Try to get the upper hand, if they don’t
  * Do something else—put down situation aspects, try to escape the conflict, etc.

It’s highly recommended that you use the [Stress-Free variant](../..
/fate-system-toolkit/customized-tools) with these rules. Otherwise, there’s a
real risk of combats dragging out, instead of knocking _down _and dragging
out.

> Dekka, an Imperial Lawkeeper of Porthos V, is facing off against her arch-
nemesis Xoren, the scheming cyborg and would-be usurper of the Celestial
Throne, in the midst of the coronation ceremony. Each is a master of the
photon blade, as they’ve demonstrated to one another multiple times in the
past. Their high-tech weapons flicker brilliantly with a copyrighted hum. It’s
on.

>

> Dekka wins initiative with a +5 to Xoren’s +3—a success, but not one with
style. She starts things off with a little patter, hoping to discover one of
his aspects using Empathy. “What’s your damage, Xoren? Is there an algorithm
for evil somewhere in your neuro-matrix? Or do you actually think this ploy is
going to work?” She gets a +6, while Xoren gets a +2. Success with style!

>

> “Evil?” he spits back. “Spend one day as a cyborg in this wretched wreck of
an empire and you’ll gain a new appreciation for _true _evil!”

>

> She discovers the aspect <span class="aspect">All Shall Suffer for My Pain!</span>,
and chooses to gain the upper hand instead of taking the extra free
invocation.

>

> Now it’s Xoren’s turn. Being an evil cyborg, he grabs a bystander and flings
him at Dekka, hoping to create an advantage with Physique. He beats Dekka by 4
shifts—enough to gain the upper hand—but she uses that free invocation on
<span class="aspect">All Shall Suffer for My Pain!</span> to reduce that to 2 shifts.
Her player explains that Xoren, in his righteous rage, accidentally
telegraphed his move. The GM buys it. Xoren puts a situation aspect of
<span class="aspect">Civilians in Danger</span> in play, with one free invocation.

>

> Dekka still has the upper hand, and she means to use it. Shoving the poor
onlooker to one side and springing forward at Xoren with her photon blade, she
attacks with Fight at +4, beating his Fight defense of +3. He capitalizes on
the fact that she’s distracted by those <span class="aspect">Civilians in
Danger</span>, using his free invocation to bump his total up to +5. After
trading a couple more fate points, Dekka comes out ahead by a single shift.
Since they’re using the Stress-Free variant, that means a mild consequence for
Xoren—<span class="aspect">Faltering Confidence</span>.

  * [« This Means War: Mass Combat](/fate-system-toolkit/means-war-mass-combat)
  * [Vehicles »](/fate-system-toolkit/vehicles)

