---
title: "Game Creation"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Game Creation

## What Makes a Good Fate Game?

You can use Fate to tell stories in many different genres, with a variety of
premises. There is no default setting; you and your group will make that up
yourselves. The very best Fate games, however, have certain ideas in common
with one another, which best showcases what the game is designed to do.

Whether you’re talking about fantasy, science fiction, superheroes, or gritty
cop shows, Fate works best when you use it to tell stories about people who
are _proactive_, _competent_, and _dramatic_.

## Proactivity

Characters in a game of Fate should be proactive. They have a variety of
abilities that lend themselves to active problem solving, and they aren’t
timid about using them. They don’t sit around waiting for the solution to a
crisis to come to them—they go out and apply their energies, taking risks and
overcoming obstacles to achieve their goals.

This doesn’t mean that they don’t ever plan or strategize, or that they’re all
careless to a fault. It just means that even the most patient among them will
eventually rise and take action in a tangible, demonstrable way.

Any Fate game you play should give a clear opportunity for the characters to
be proactive in solving their problems, and have a variety of ways they might
go about it. A game about librarians spending all their time among dusty tomes
and learning things isn’t Fate. A game about librarians_ using forgotten
knowledge to save the world is_.

## Competence

Characters in a game of Fate are good at things. They aren’t bumbling fools
who routinely look ridiculous when they’re trying to get things done—they’re
highly skilled, talented, or trained individuals who are capable of making
visible change in the world they inhabit. They are the right people for the
job, and they get involved in a crisis because they have a good chance of
being able to resolve it for the better.

This doesn’t mean they always succeed, or that their actions are without
unintended consequence. It just means that when they fail, it isn’t because
they made dumb mistakes or weren’t prepared for the risks.

Any Fate game that you play should treat the characters like competent people,
worthy of the risks and challenges that come their way. A game about garbage
men who are forced to fight supervillains and get their asses constantly
handed to them isn’t Fate. A game about garbage men who _become an awesome
anti-supervillain hit squad is_.

## Drama

Characters in a game of Fate lead dramatic lives. The stakes are always high
for them, both in terms of what they have to deal with in their world, and
what they’re dealing with in the six inches of space between their ears. Like
us, they have interpersonal troubles and struggle with their issues, and
though the external circumstances of their lives might be a lot bigger in
scope than what we go through, we can still relate to and sympathize with
them.

This doesn’t mean they spend all their time wallowing in misery and pain, or
that everything in their lives is always a world-shaking crisis. It just means
that their lives require them to make hard choices and live with the
consequences—in other words, that they’re essentially human.

Any Fate game that you play should provide the potential and opportunity for
drama among and between the characters, and give you a chance to relate to
them as people. A game about adventurers mindlessly punching increasing
numbers of bigger, badder bad guys is not Fate. A game about adventurers
_struggling to lead normal lives despite being destined to fight ultimate evil
is_.

### When Creating Your Game:

  * **Setting:** Decide what the world that surrounds the protagonists is like.
  * **Scale:** Decide how epic or personal your story will be.
  * **Issues:** Decide what threats and pressures inherent to the setting will spur the protagonists to action.
  * **NPCs:** Decide who the important people and locations are.
  * **Skills and Stunts:** Decide what sorts of things characters in the setting are likely to want to do.
  * **Character Creation:** Make the PCs.

  * [« Start Playing](/fate-core/start-playing)
  * [Setting Up Your Game »](/fate-core/setting-your-game)

  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

