---
title: "Fate Points"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Fate Points

You use tokens to represent how many fate points you have at any given time
during play. Fate points are one of your most important resources in
Fate—they’re a measure of how much influence you have to make the story go in
your character’s favor.

You can spend fate points to **invoke** an aspect, to declare a story detail,
or to activate certain powerful stunts.

You earn fate points by accepting a **compel** on one of your aspects.

A word of warning: don’t use edible things as tokens, especially if the food
hasn’t arrived yet.

## Invoking an Aspect

Whenever you’re making a skill roll, and you’re in a situation where an
[aspect might be able to help you](../../fate-core/invoking-
compelling-aspects "Invoking An Aspect" ), you can spend a fate point to
invoke it in order to change the dice result.** This allows you to either
reroll the dice or add +2 to your roll, whichever is more helpful.**
(Typically, +2 is a good choice if you rolled –2 or higher, but sometimes you
want to risk a reroll to get that +4.) You do this after you’ve rolled the
dice—if you aren’t happy with your total.

**You also have to explain or justify how the aspect is helpful in order to get the bonus**—sometimes it’ll be self-evident, and sometimes it might require some creative narrating.

You can spend more than one fate point on a single roll, gaining another
reroll or an additional +2, as long as each point you spend invokes a
different aspect.

> Cynere is trying to covertly goad a merchant into describing the security
features of his personal vault by posing as a visiting dignitary. The merchant
is giving her passive opposition at Good (+3), and her Deceive skill is Fair
(+2).

>

> Lily rolls. She breaks even, getting a 0. That leaves her result at Fair,
not enough to get the information she wants.

>

> She looks at her character sheet, then to Amanda, and says, “You know, long
years of being <span class="aspect">Tempted by Shiny Things</span> has taught me a
thing or two about what’s in a treasure hoard and what’s not. I’m going to
impress this merchant by talking about the rarest, most prized elements of his
collection.”

>

> Amanda grins and nods. Lily hands over a fate point to invoke the aspect,
and gets to add +2 to her standing roll. This brings her result to a Great
(+4), which exceeds the opposition. The duly impressed merchant starts to brag
about his vault, and Cynere listens intently....

## Declaring a Story Detail

Sometimes, you want to add a detail that works to your character’s advantage
in a scene. For example, you might use this to narrate a convenient
coincidence, like retroactively having the right supplies for a certain job
(“Of course I brought that along!”), showing up at a dramatically appropriate
moment, or suggesting that you and the NPC you just met have mutual clients in
common.

To do this, you’ll spend a fate point. You should try to justify your story
details by relating them to your aspects. GMs, you have the right to veto any
suggestions that seem out of scope or ask the player to revise them,
especially if the rest of the group isn’t buying into it.

> Zird the Arcane gets captured with his friends by some tribesfolk from the
Sagroth Wilds. The three heroes are unceremoniously dumped before the
chieftain, and Amanda describes the chieftain addressing them in a strange,
guttural tongue.

>

> Ryan looks at his sheet and says, “Hey, I have <span class="aspect">If I Haven’t
Been There, I’ve Read About It</span> on my sheet. Can I declare that I’ve
studied this language at some point, so we can communicate?”

>

> Amanda thinks that’s perfectly reasonable to assume. Ryan tosses over a fate
point and describes Zird answering in the chieftain’s own speech, which turns
all eyes in the village (including those of his friends) on him in a moment of
surprise.

>

> Ryan has Zird look at his friends and say, “Books. They’re good for you.”

## Compels

Sometimes (in fact, probably often), [you’ll find yourself in a situation
where an aspect complicates](../../fate-core/invoking-compelling-
aspects "Being Compelled" ) your character’s life and creates unexpected
drama. When that happens, the GM will suggest a potential complication that
might arise. This is called a compel.

Sometimes, a compel means your character automatically fails at some goal, or
your character’s choices are restricted, or simply that unintended
consequences cloud whatever your character does. You might negotiate back and
forth on the details a little, to arrive at what would be most appropriate and
dramatic in the moment.

Once you’ve agreed to accept the complication, you get a fate point for your
troubles. If you want, you can pay a fate point to prevent the complication
from happening, but it is not recommended that you do that very often—you’ll
probably need that fate point later, and getting compelled brings drama (and
hence, fun) into your game’s story.

Players, you’re going to call for a compel when you want there to be a
complication in a decision you’ve just made, if it’s related to one of your
aspects. GMs, you’re going to call for a compel when you make the world
respond to the characters in a complicated or dramatic way.

Anyone at the table is free to suggest when a compel might be appropriate for
any character (including their own). GMs, you have the final word on whether
or not a compel is valid. And speak up if you see that a compel happened
naturally as a result of play, but no fate points were awarded.

> Landon has the aspect <span class="aspect">The Manners of a Goat</span>. He is
attending the annual Grand Ball in Ictherya with his friends, courtesy of the
royal court.

>

> Amanda tells the players, “As you’re milling about, a sharply dressed young
lady catches Landon sticking out of the crowd. She observes him for a while,
then goes to engage him in conversation, obviously intrigued by how different
he looks among all the stuffy nobles.” She turns to Lenny. “What do you do?”

>

> Lenny says, “Uh... well, I guess I’ll ask her to dance and play along, see
what I can find out about her.”

>

> Amanda holds up a fate point and says, “And is that going to go wrong, given
Landon’s excellent command of courtly etiquette?”

>

> Lenny chuckles and replies, “Yeah, I presume Landon will offend her pretty
quickly, and that’ll get complicated. I’ll take the fate point.”

>

> Amanda and Lenny play a bit to figure out just how Landon puts his foot in
his mouth, and then Amanda describes some of the royal guard showing up. One
of them says, “You might want to watch how you speak to the High Duchess of
Ictherya, outlander.”

>

> Lenny shakes his head. Amanda grins the grin of the devil.

  * [« Taking Action, Dice, &amp; the Ladder](/fate-core/taking-action-dice-ladder)
  * [Start Playing »](/fate-core/start-playing)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character

