---
title: "Who Do You Want To Be?"
---
    
Fate Accelerated

#  Who Do You Want To Be?

Once you’ve decided what kind of story you’ll be telling in your game, you
decide who your character is—what they look like, what they’re good at, and
what they believe.

## What Kind of Characters Can I Play?

Think about the setting that you’ve decided to play in and make that your main
guide. Are you playing in a school for young sorcerers? Play a young sorcerer!
Are you playing space pilots fighting an evil empire? Play a space pilot! Make
sure your character has a reason to interact and cooperate with the characters
the other players are making.

## How Do I Make the Character?

Now it’s time to start writing stuff down. Grab a pencil and a copy of the
[character sheet](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fate-core-downloads/ "Download a
Character Sheet from Evil Hat" ). Some people like to use form-fillable PDFs
on a laptop or tablet computer. Any of that’s fine, but you definitely want
something that lets you erase and change.

### Aspects in a Nutshell

An aspect is a word, phrase, or sentence that describes something centrally
important to your character. It can be a motto your character lives by, a
personality quirk, a description of a relationship you have with another
character, an important possession or bit of equipment your character has, or
any other part of your character that is vitally important.

Aspects allow you to change the story in ways that tie in with your
character’s tendencies, skills, or problems. You can also use them to
[establish facts about the setting](../../fate-accelerated/aspects-
fate-points "Aspects & Fate Points" ), such as the presence of magic or the
existence of a useful ally, dangerous enemy, or secret organization.

Your character will have a handful of aspects (between three and five),
including a high concept and a trouble. Aspects are discussed in detail in
[Aspects and Fate Points](../../fate-accelerated/aspects-fate-
points)—but for now, this should help you get the idea.

### High Concept

First, decide on your character’s high concept. This is a single phrase or
sentence that neatly sums up your character, saying who you are, what you do,
what your “deal” is. When you think about your high concept, try to think of
two things: how this aspect could help you, and how it might make things
harder for you. Good high concept aspects do both.

**Examples**: <span class="aspect">Feline Captain of Cirrus Skimmer</span>; <span class="aspect">Suncaller of the Andral Desert</span>; <span class="aspect">Chief Field Agent of IGEMA</span>

### Trouble

Next, decide on the thing that always gets you into trouble. It could be a
personal weakness, or a recurring enemy, or an important obligation—anything
that makes your life complicated.

**Examples**: <span class="aspect">Steel Assassins Want Me Dead</span>; <span class="aspect">Cast Now</span>, <span class="aspect">Ask Questions Later</span>; <span class="aspect">Gotta Look Out for My Little Brother</span>

### Another Aspect

Now compose another aspect. Think of something really important or interesting
about your character. Are they the strongest person in their hometown? Do they
carry a mighty sword known through history? Do they talk too much? Are they
filthy rich?

### Optional: One or Two Additional Aspects

If you wish, you may create one or two more aspects. These aspects might
describe your character’s relationship with other player characters or with an
NPC. Or, like the third aspect you composed above, it might describe something
especially interesting about your character.

If you prefer, you can leave one or both of these aspects blank right now and
fill them in later, after the game has started.

### Name and Appearance

Describe your character’s appearance and give them a name.

### Creating Characters: The 30-Second Version

  * Write two aspects: a high concept and a trouble.
  * Write another aspect.
  * Give your character a name and describe their appearance.
  * [Choose approaches](../../fate-accelerated/how-do-stuff-outcomes-actions-and-approaches).
  * Set your refresh to 3.
  * You may write up to two more aspects and [choose a stunt](../../fate-accelerated/stunts) if you wish, or you may do that during play.

### Approaches

Choose your **approaches**.

Approaches are descriptions of how you accomplish tasks. Everyone has the same
six approaches:

  * Careful
  * Clever
  * Flashy
  * Forceful
  * Quick
  * Sneaky

Each approach is rated with a bonus.** Choose one at Good (+3), two at Fair
(+2), two at Average (+1), and one at Mediocre (+0)**. You can improve these
later. What each approach means and how you use them can be found in [How to
Do Stuff: Outcomes, Approaches, and Actions](../../fate-accelerated
/how-do-stuff-outcomes-actions-and-approaches).

### The Ladder

Fate uses a ladder of adjectives and numbers to rate a character’s approaches,
the result of a roll, difficulty ratings for simple checks, etc.

Here’s the ladder:

+8| Legendary  
---|---  
+7| Epic  
+6| Fantastic  
+5| Superb  
+4| Great  
+3| Good  
+2| Fair  
+1| Average  
0| Mediocre  
-1| Poor  
-2| Terrible  
  
Your approaches can say a lot about who you are. Here are some examples:

  * **The Brute**:  
Forceful +3, Careful and Flashy +2, Sneaky and Quick +1, Clever +0

  * **The All-Star**:  
Quick +3, Forceful and Flashy +2, Clever and Careful +1, Sneaky +0

  * **The Trickster**:  
Clever +3, Sneaky and Flashy +2, Forceful and Quick +1, Careful +0

  * **The Guardian**:  
Careful +3, Forceful and Clever +2, Sneaky and Quick +1, Flashy +0

  * **The Thief**:  
Sneaky +3, Careful and Quick +2, Clever and Flashy +1, Forceful +0

  * **The Swashbuckler**:  
Flashy +3, Quick and Clever +2, Forceful and Sneaky +1, Careful +0

### Stunts and Refresh

**A stunt is a special trait that changes the way an approach works for your character.** Generally, stunts give you a bonus (almost always +2) to a certain approach when used with a particular action under specific circumstances. Find out more about stunts in [Stunts](../../fate-accelerated/stunts "Stunts" ). Choose one stunt to start, or you can wait and add a stunt during the game. Later, when your character advances, you can choose more.

Your refresh is the number of fate points you begin each game session
with—unless you ended the previous session with more unspent fate points than
your refresh, in which case you start with the number you had left last time.
By default, your refresh starts at three and is reduced by one for each stunt
after the first three you choose—essentially, your first three stunts are
free! As your character advances, you’ll get opportunities to add to your
refresh. Your refresh may never go below one.

### How Many Stunts?

By default, FAE suggests choosing one stunt to start with.

However, if this is your first time playing a Fate game, you might find it
easier to pick your first stunt after you’ve had a chance to play a bit, to
give you an idea of what a good stunt might be. Just add your stunt during or
after your first game session.

On the other hand, if you’re an experienced Fate gamer, you might look ahead
and discover that, just like in Fate Core, your character is entitled to three
free stunts before it starts costing you refresh. In that case, let the least
experienced member of your game group be your guide; if someone is new to the
game and only takes one to start with, that’s what everyone should do. If
you’re all experienced, and you want to start with more powerful characters,
just take all three to start and off you go.

  * [« Telling Stories Together](/fate-accelerated/telling-stories-together)
  * [How To Do Stuff: Outcomes, Actions, and Approaches »](/fate-accelerated/how-do-stuff-outcomes-actions-and-approaches)

  *[FAE]: Fate Accelerated
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character

