---
title: "The Long Game"
---
    
Fate Core

#  The Long Game

## Defining Arcs

When you sit down to play Fate, you might just play a single session. That’s a
viable way to play the game, but let’s assume that you want it to go a bit
longer. What you need, then, is an arc.

An [arc is a complete storyline](../../fate-core/building-arc) with
its own themes, situations, antagonists, innocent bystanders, and endgame,
told in the span of a few scenarios (somewhere between two and five, usually).
You don’t need to have everything planned out (in fact, you probably
shouldn’t, given that no meticulously planned story ever survives contact with
the players), but you need to have an idea of where things begin and end, and
what might happen in the middle.

To make a fictional analogy, an arc is a lot like a single book. It tells its
own story and ends when it’s done; you provide some form of closure and move
on. Sometimes you move on to another story, and sometimes your book is just
the first in a series of books. That’s when you have a campaign.

## Defining Campaigns

When you have multiple arcs that are connected and told in a sequence, and
that have an overarching story or theme that runs through all of them, you
have a campaign. [Campaigns are long, taking months or even years to complete
](../../fate-core/building-campaign) (if you ever do).

Of course, that doesn’t need to be as scary as it might sound. Yes, a campaign
is long and large and complex. You don’t, however, need to come up with the
whole thing at once. As with an arc, you may have an idea where it begins and
ends (and that can be helpful), but you really only need to plan an arc at a
time.

See, the players are so prone to shaking things up and changing things on you
that planning more than one arc at a time is often frustrating and futile.
Planning the second arc of a campaign based on the events of the first arc,
how it turned out, and what your players did, though...well, that can make for
very satisfying play.

  * [« The Scenario In Play](/fate-core/scenario-play)
  * [Building an Arc »](/fate-core/building-arc)

