---
title: "Set Up The First Scene"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Set Up The First Scene

Start things off by being as unsubtle as possible—take one of your story
questions, come up with something that will bring the question into sharp
relief, and hit your players over the head with it as hard as you can. You
don’t have to answer it right off the bat (though there’s nothing wrong with
that, either), but you should show the players that the question demands an
answer.

That way, you’re setting an example for the rest of the session and getting
the momentum going, ensuring the players won’t dither around. Remember,
they’re supposed to be proactive, competent people—give them something to be
proactive and competent about right from the get-go.

If you’re in an ongoing campaign, you might need the first scenes of a session
to resolve loose ends that were left hanging from a previous session. It’s
okay to spend time on that, because it helps keep the sense of continuity
going from session to session. As soon as there’s a lull in momentum, though,
hit them with your opening scene fast and hard.

> An Arcane Conspiracy: The Opening Scene

>

> Amanda mulls over her questions and thinks about what she wants as her
opening scene. A couple of obvious suggestions come to mind:

>

>   * Enforcers from the Collegia show up at Zird’s door and serve him papers,
demanding he come with them.

>   * Cynere receives the contract and job details from a mysterious employer,
and must decide whether or not to sign.

>

>

> She decides to go with the latter scene, because she figures that if Cynere
rebuffs the contract and then finds out that Zird’s going to the Collegia
anyway, it might create a fun scene where she tries to get the mysterious
employer to reconsider. And even if she sticks to her guns, it’ll establish
whether or not they’ll have to deal with any drama on the way there, as the
mysterious employer’s lackeys harass them on the way.

>

> That doesn’t mean she’s going to just toss the scene with Zird aside—she’s
just going to save it for a follow-up to the first scene.

## Powerful Session-Starting Ninja GM Trick

Asking the players to contribute something to the beginning of your first
scene is a great way to help get them invested in what’s going on right off
the bat. If there’s anything that’s flexible about your opening prompt, ask
your players to fill in the blanks for you when you start the scene. Clever
players may try to use it as an opportunity to push for a compel and get extra
fate points right off the bat—we like to call this sort of play “awesome.”

> Let’s look at our example scenes above. The prompts don’t specify where the
PCs are when they get confronted with their first choices. So, Amanda might
start the session by asking Ryan, “Where exactly isZird when the brute squad
from the Collegia comes looking for him?”

>

> Now, even if Ryan just replies with “in his sanctuary,” you’ve solicited his
participation and helped him set the scene. But Ryan is awesome, so what he
says instead is, “Oh, probably at the public baths, soaking after a long day
of research.”

>

> “Perfect!” says Amanda, and holds out a fate point. “So, it’d make sense
that yourRivals in the Collegia Arcana would have divined precisely the right
time to catch you away from all your magical implements and gear, right?”

>

> Ryan grins and takes the fate point. “Yeah, that sounds about right.”

Of course, you can also just have your opening scenario hooks count as “pre-
loaded” compels, and hand out some fate points at the start of a session to
start the PCs off with a spot of trouble they have to deal with immediately.
This helps low-refresh players out and can kickstart the spending of fate
points right off the bat. Make sure your group is okay with giving you carte
blanche authority to narrate them into a situation, though—some players find
the loss of control problematic.

> Amanda wants to start the players off with a number of fate points off the
bat, so at the beginning of the session, she says to the players:

>

> “Zird, it’s bad enough when your <span class="aspect">Rivals in the Collegia
Arcana</span> give you trouble, but when they pretend to be peasants in the
local watering hole, get you drunk, and start a bar fight so they can haul you
somewhere secluded, it’s even worse. You wake up with a five-alarm hangover
and a black eye—someone punched you in the face!” (2 fate points, for Rivals
and <span class="aspect">Not the Face!</span>)

>

> “Landon, I know <span class="aspect">Smashing is Always an Option</span>, but how
are you going to explain what happened when you tried to fix the wagon while
everyone else was away?” (1 fate point for Smashing.)

>

> “Cynere, whoever decided to make you this contract offer knows you pretty
well. They’ve included several large gems along with the contract. Problem is,
you also know what noble house they were stolen from, and there’s no doubt
you’ll be a wanted woman if you don’t sign—and you’re infamous enough that you
know no one’s going to believe how you came by them.” (2 fate points for
<span class="aspect">Infamous Girl with Sword</span> and <span class="aspect">Tempted by Shiny
Things</span>.)

  * [« Establish the Opposition](/fate-core/establish-opposition)
  * [Defining Scenes »](/fate-core/defining-scenes)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[PC]: Player Character

