---
title: "Getting Better at Doing Stuff: Character Advancement"
---
    
Fate Accelerated

#  Getting Better at Doing Stuff: Character Advancement

People change. Your skills sharpen as you practice them. Your life experiences
accumulate and shape your personality.Fate Accelerated Edition reflects that
with character advancement, which allows you to change your aspects, add or
change stunts, and raise your approach bonuses. You do this when your
character reaches a milestone.

## Milestones

Stories in TV shows, comic books, movies, and even video games usually
continue from episode to episode, season to season. It took Frodo three big
books to take the Ring to the fiery mountain. It took Aang three seasons to
defeat the Fire Lord. You get the idea. FAE can tell those kinds of stories;
you play many game sessions in a row using the same characters—this is often
called a **campaign**—and the story builds on itself. But within these long
stories, there are shorter story arcs, like single episodes of a TV show or
single issues of a comic, where shorter stories are told and wrapped up. FAE
can do that too, even within a longer campaign.

In FAE, we call those wrap-ups **milestones**—whether they’re small ones for
short stories, or really big ones at the end of many sessions of play. FAE
recognizes three types of milestones, and each one allows you to change your
character in certain ways.

### Minor Milestones

A **minor milestone** usually occurs at the end of a session of play, or when
one piece of a story has been resolved. Rather than making your character more
powerful, this kind of milestone is more about changing your character, about
adjusting in response to whatever’s going on in the story if you need to.
Sometimes it won’t really make sense to take advantage of a minor milestone,
but you always have the opportunity in case you need to.

After a minor milestone, you can choose to do one (and only one) of the
following:

  * Switch the ratings of any two approaches.
  * Rename one aspect that isn’t your high concept.
  * Exchange one stunt for a different stunt.
  * Choose a new stunt (and adjust your refresh, if you already have three stunts).

Also, if you have a moderate consequence, check to see if it’s been around for
two sessions. If so, you can clear it.

### Significant Milestones

A **significant milestone** usually occurs at the end of a [scenario](../../fate-accelerated/being-gamemaster "Being the Gamemaster" ) or the
conclusion of a big plot event (or, when in doubt, at the end of every two or
three sessions). Unlike minor milestones, which are primarily about change,
significant milestones are about learning new things—dealing with problems and
challenges has made your character generally more capable at what they do.

In addition to the benefit of a minor milestone, you also gain both of the
following:

  * If you have a severe consequence that’s been around for at least two sessions, you can clear it.
  * Raise the bonus of one approach by one.

### Raising Approach Bonuses

When you raise the bonus of an approach, there’s only one rule you need to
remember: you can’t raise an approach bonus above Superb (+5).

### Major Milestones

**Major milestones** should only occur when something happens in the campaign that shakes it up a lot—the end of a big story arc, the final defeat of a main NPC villain, or any other large-scale change that reverberates around your game world.

These milestones are about gaining more power. The challenges of yesterday
simply aren’t sufficient to threaten these characters anymore, and the threats
of tomorrow will need to be more adept, organized, and determined to stand
against them.

Achieving a major milestone confers the benefits of a significant milestone
and a minor milestone. In addition, you may doall of the following:

  * Take an additional point of refresh, which you may immediately use to purchase a stunt if you wish.
  * Rename your character’s high concept (optional).

  * [« Stunts](/fate-accelerated/stunts)
  * [Being the Gamemaster »](/fate-accelerated/being-gamemaster)

  *[FAE]: Fate Accelerated
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character

