---
title: "Cyberware"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Cyberware

The easiest way to handle cyberware in a Fate game is with the existing tools.
Want to be a cyborg? Tie an aspect or two to the fact that you’ve got some
augmentations. Do your cyber-arms make you superhumanly strong? Make Physique
or Fight your peak skill. Do your eyes grant you thermal imaging? A stunt can
do that for you.

If you want a system for cyberware that stands on its own rather than
reskinning existing systems or a justification for things you were going to
take anyway, that’s what this section is for.

## Prostheses vs. Augs

Cyberware takes a toll on a person, it has a cost. Plenty of people out there
have the odd cyber-prosthesis, a simple limb meant to mimic the functionality
of its human counterpart, attached to compensate for a loss or injury. All
these new pieces will cost you is some money and time spent in a rehab
facility, and you’ll be right as rain, back to your old self—mostly. If all
you want is a prosthesis or two, you don’t need to pay any refresh and you
don’t need to tie any aspects to your cyber-prostheses unless you want to.

Augmentations, or **augs**, are quite another matter. Where a prosthesis is
designed to integrate into the body, mimicking natural function as best it
can, an aug is meant to _improve _the human body, making a person stronger,
faster, more durable, bristling with natural weaponry, or capable of things
that humans just can’t do on their own. Where a person usually gets a
prosthesis to replace a lost piece and become whole again, many people get
body parts _cut off_ to have augs installed.

These augs need a power source, something beyond the normal bio-electric
energy that the human body produces. To that end, people who get augs first
get a cyber-heart. A cyber-heart isn’t a literal heart. It doesn’t replace
your human heart unless you need it to, though it does work as a decent
backup, if you’ve already got a functioning ticker. What a cyber-heart is,
first and foremost, is a power source. It’s a capacitor that charges from your
own bio-electric currents, can be supplemented by plugging into a wall outlet,
and allows you to power one or more augs.

This means two things in-game. First, it means that you _must _tie at least
one of your aspects to the fact that you’re a cyborg. You’ve willingly
transcended your human limitations—that’s a defining feature of any person who
chooses this path. The second mechanical cost is that you must reduce your
refresh by 1, in exchange for the following aug.

**Cyber-Heart**: You can install and use other cyber-augs. The heart also acts as a backup for your natural heart and filters impurities and toxins from your blood. If you’re subject to a poison or toxin, spend a fate point to ignore it. If you’re ever killed by something the cyber-heart could conceivably save you from, spend a fate point to concede instead of being taken out.

## Types of Augs

There are two types of augs: minor augs and major augs. Getting either
installed costs you both money and time, and might cost you refresh as well.

**Minor augs** are small changes, things that don’t tax the body overmuch or require huge changes to your underlying biological systems. A new eye, a hand, a skin implant, or an upgrade to an existing aug—these kinds of things are all minor augs. If you buy and install a minor aug in-game, it requires a Resources roll at Average (+1), +1 for each additional minor aug you’re having installed. You’ll also need to recover from surgery. Doing so puts a moderate consequence on you, from which you recover normally. Whether you pick up your minor augs at character creation or during play, every three minor augs you take cost you 1 point of refresh. Once you take your first minor aug, drop your refresh. When you hit four, drop it again, and so on. Getting a prosthesis installed carries the same Resources and consequence costs, but doesn’t carry the refresh cost.

A **major aug** requires major surgery and replacing a large part of your
body. Limbs are always major augs, as are organs and anything that jacks into
your brain. When you get a major aug during play, it requires a Resources roll
at Good (+3) for _each _major aug you get. In addition, having a major aug
surgically installed also puts a severe consequence on you, from which you
recover normally. Whether at character generation or during play, _each _major
aug costs you a point of refresh.

## Example Augs

**Cyber-Eye (minor)**: You get a +1 bonus to sight-based Notice rolls. In addition, choose one of the following aspects. Adding an additional aspect is another minor aug.

<span class="aspect">Image Filtering</span>,<span class="aspect"> </span><span class="aspect">Low-
Light Vision</span>, <span class="aspect">Sonar Imaging</span>, <span class="aspect">Targeting
Interface, </span>Thermal Imaging, Visual Net Interface, Zoom Magnification

**Cyber-Legs (major)**: Both of your legs have been replaced by much more powerful cybernetic legs. You can move two zones as a free action, and you get a +2 to Athletics rolls made to run or jump. In addition, pick one of the following add-ons. Additional add-ons are each a minor aug.

  * **Hidden Compartment**: You’ve got a compartment where you can hide things, like a hand gun or a brick of cocaine.
  * **Magnetic Grip**: If you’re standing on a metallic surface, you can’t be knocked down. You can also walk up steep or even vertical metallic surfaces, albeit clumsily.
  * **Pneumatic Kick**: If you kick someone, your kick is Weapon:2.

**Neural Interface (major)**: You can access the Net from anywhere, with a thought. You can hack low-security systems automatically—they just do what you want them to do. Even high-security systems are easy—you get a +2 to Computers rolls to get through them.

**Razor Nails (minor)**: You’ve got one-inch, razor-sharp blades that pop out of your finger tips; you can retract them at will. These blades are Weapon:1.

**Subdermal Plating (major)**: You can oppose most physical attacks using Physique—fists, blades, truncheons, and small arms fire have trouble getting through the plating beneath your skin. In addition, once per scene you may ignore any one mild or moderate physical consequence from such an attack.

**Thermoptic Camouflage (minor)**: You can spend a fate point to become invisible to the visual and thermal spectrums, for as long as you don’t move.

## The Downside of Augs

Though not explicitly stated above, every aug has drawbacks. A neural
interface can be hacked, giving a hacker access to your brain. Thermoptic
camouflage might short out when you’re doused in water, delivering a nasty
electric shock. That’s why you have an aspect tied to the fact that you’re a
cyborg.

GMs, feel free to enforce the downside of an aug—whatever your group
determines that might be. Doing so is a compel on the cyborg’s aspect, which
means that a player you put in such a situation can refuse your compel or take
a fate point for the trouble you put her in.

  * [« Kung Fu](/fate-system-toolkit/kung-fu)
  * [Gadgets and Gear »](/fate-system-toolkit/gadgets-and-gear)

