---
title: "Using Skills as Written"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Using Skills as Written

The easiest thing to do in most cases is to simply tweak the skill list to
reflect the needs of your specific game, and there are a few ways to approach
that.

## Adding or Removing Skills

Is making stuff not an important part of your game? Get rid of Craft. Do you
want people to be able to maneuver in zero-G? Add a skill to do that. This is
one of the easiest ways to hack the skill list because all you’re doing is
going skill by skill and deciding what isn’t necessary and what needs to be
added.

There are a couple of things to keep in mind here. First, if you subtract too
many skills then the players might have access to too much of the skill list.
If there’s too much overlap between PCs, you can wind up with PCs getting too
little spotlight time. Conversely, if you add too many skills you might wind
up with PCs who don’t have access to _enough _of the skill list, meaning
they’re often missing a critical skill in a given situation. An easy fix is
appropriately increasing or decreasing the number of skills each PC gets
during character creation.

Consider that Fate Core has 18 skills. As a rule of thumb, the pyramid allows
a character to really stand out in 3 of them and have rankings in 7 more,
leaving 8 unaccounted for. It’s not a precise ratio, but it’s worth keeping in
mind when deciding if you need to change the pyramid. See [Structural Changes
](../../fate-system-toolkit/structural-changes) for more details.

Finally, keep in mind that changes to skills have repercussions on stress
tracks and turn order.

## Reskinning and Making Alterations

If all of the default skills work for you from a mechanical perspective, but
some of them don’t quite work with the themes of your game, change a few
details. Lore might become Academia or Knowledge, Drive becomes Ride or Pilot,
and so on. Doing this might also alter what a given skill can do. For example,
if you reskin Lore to become Arcana and then determine that it’s the skill for
spellcasting, suddenly it makes sense for you to be able to attack or defend
with it.

## Expansion and Compression

One handy trick for altering the skill list is to look at the skills in terms
of their sphere of activity and how important they are to your game. If a
particular sphere is less important, then you can compress the skills within
that sphere into a single skill—in a non-violent game, you might compress
Shoot and Fight into a single fight skill. On the other hand, if a particular
sphere is very important, you might want to split that skill into finer
gradients. If martial arts are important to your game, you might want to
expand Fight into multiple skills, perhaps Armed, Hard Styles, and Soft
Styles. The advantage of this approach is that the general guidelines for the
skills are still in effect—you’re just adjusting the level of focus.

  * [« Skills](/fate-system-toolkit/skills)
  * [Other Solutions »](/fate-system-toolkit/other-solutions)

