---
title: "Contacts"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Contacts

Contacts is the skill of knowing and making connections with people. It
presumes proficiency with all means of networking available in the setting.

<span class="fate_font">O</span>**Overcome**: You use Contacts to overcome any
obstacle related to finding someone you need to find. Whether that’s old-
fashioned “man on the street” type of work, polling your information network,
or searching archives and computer databases, you’re able to hunt down people
or somehow get access to them.

<span class="fate_font">C</span>**Create an Advantage**: Contacts allows you to
know who the perfect person to talk to is for anything you might need, or to
decide that you know the perfect person already. It’s likely that you’ll
create story details with this skill, represented by aspects. (“Hey, guys, my
contacts tell me that Joe Steel is the <span class="aspect">Best Mechanic For A
Thousand Miles</span>—we should talk to him.”)

You can also create an advantage that represents what the word on the street
is about a particular individual, object, or location, based on what your
contacts tell you. These aspects almost always deal with reputation more than
fact, such as <span class="aspect">Known as a Mean Guy</span> or
<span class="aspect">Notorious Swindler</span>. Whether that person lives up to their
reputation is anybody’s guess, though that doesn’t invalidate the
aspect—people often have misleading reputations that complicate their lives.

Contacts could also be used to create aspects that represent using your
information network to plant or acquire information.

<span class="fate_font">A</span>**Attack**: Contacts isn’t used for attacks; it’s hard
to harm someone simply by knowing people.

<span class="fate_font">D</span>**Defend**: Contacts can be used to defend against
people creating social advantages against you, provided your information
network can be brought to bear in the situation. You might also use it to keep
someone from using Deceive or Contacts to go “off the grid”, or to interfere
with Investigate attempts to find you.

## Stunts

  * **Ear to the Ground.** Whenever someone initiates a conflict against you in an area where you’ve built a network of contacts, you use Contacts instead of Notice to determine turn order, because you got tipped off in time.
  * **Rumormonger.** +2 to create an advantage when you plant vicious rumors about someone else.
  * **The Weight of Reputation.** You can use Contacts instead of Provoke to create advantages based on the fear generated by the sinister reputation you’ve cultivated for yourself and all the shady associates you have. You should have an appropriate aspect to pair with this stunt.

  * [« Burglary](/fate-core/burglary)
  * [Crafts »](/fate-core/crafts)

