---
title: "Conditions"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Conditions

Consequences are a great way to handle injuries, emotional scarring, and other
persistent conditions within the fiction of your game. They’re not for
everyone, though. Some people have trouble coming up with good consequences on
the fly, while others want something more defined and concrete. Still others
just want something different.

**Conditions **are like consequences, except that they’re pre-defined, like this:

**Fleeting**

  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Angry
  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Frightened

**Sticky**

  * 2 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Exhausted
  * 2 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Hungry

Lasting

  * 4 <span class="fate_font">1</span> <span class="fate_font">1</span> Broken
  * 4 <span class="fate_font">1</span> <span class="fate_font">1</span> Wounded

There are three kinds of conditions: fleeting, sticky, and lasting. A fleeting
condition goes away when you get a chance to catch your breath and calm down.
In the example above, Angry and Frightened are fleeting conditions. A **sticky
condition** stays checked off until a specific event happens. If you’re
Exhausted, you’re Exhausted until you get some sleep. If you’re Hungry, you’re
Hungry until you get a good meal. Wounded and Broken are both **lasting
conditions**. These stick around for at least one whole session, and require
someone to overcome an obstacle with a passive opposition of at least Great
(+4) before you can start to recover from them. Lasting conditions have two
check boxes next to them, and you check them both off when you take the
condition. When recovery begins, erase one check box. Erase the second one
(and recover from it fully) after one more full session. You can take a
lasting condition only if _both _of its check boxes are empty.

You suffer from a condition when the GM says you suffer from a
condition—usually as a result of your narrative situation—but you can also use
them to soak stress. When you take stress, you can reduce that stress by 1 if
you check off a fleeting condition, by 2 stress if you check off a sticky
condition, or by 4 stress if you check off a lasting condition. You can check
off as many conditions as you’d like for a single hit.

Once you’re suffering from a condition, that condition is an aspect on your
character sheet like any other. In this way, conditions are a lot like
consequences—you can invoke them, and they can be invoked or compelled against
you. As with a consequence, when you take a condition, someone else can invoke
it against you for free once.

If you’re going to use conditions in your game, one thing you can do to
reinforce the theme or style of your game is to come up with your own
conditions. You don’t have to stick to the same spread of two fleeting/two
sticky/two lasting as presented here, but you should stick to the same total
number of shifts of stress-soaking: 14. Also make sure to follow the
guidelines for the different types of conditions—fleeting conditions go away
quickly, sticky conditions require a narrative trigger, and lasting conditions
require treatment. The conditions above are non-specific enough to be used in
a wide variety of settings, but tailoring conditions to your setting can be an
effective way to make the characters feel more like a part of that setting.

As an example, here are alternate conditions from Jason Morningstar’s Fight
Fire (found in [_Fate Worlds: Worlds on
Fire_](http://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/119383/Fate-Worlds-Worlds-on-
Fire?affiliate_id=144937)):

**Fleeting**

  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Winded
  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Bruised
  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Panicked
  * 1 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Disoriented

Sticky

  * 2 <span class="fate_font">1</span> Dehydrated

Lasting

  * 4 <span class="fate_font">1</span> <span class="fate_font">1</span> Injured
  * 4 <span class="fate_font">1</span> <span class="fate_font">1</span> Broken

### Clarification—Why Do Conditions Absorb 14 Stress When Core only Absorbs
12?

From [Brian Engard's comment on this
thread](https://plus.google.com/+RichardBellinghamSkimble/posts/e3BrVDrytuw),
"I mainly put them in [the extra 2 stress boxes] to make up for the fact that
a high skill doesn't give you any additional conditions the way a high
Physique or Will would give you extra consequences.﻿"

  * [« Gear Aspects](/fate-system-toolkit/gear-aspects)
  * [Skills »](/fate-system-toolkit/skills)

