---
title: "Challenges, Contests, and Conflicts"
---
    
Fate Accelerated

#  Challenges, Contests, and Conflicts

We’ve talked about the four actions (create an advantage, overcome, attack,
and defend) and the four outcomes (fail, tie, succeed, and succeed with
style). But in what framework do those happen?

Usually, when you want to do something straightforward—swim across a raging
river, hack someone’s cell phone—all you need to do is make one overcome
action [against a difficulty level](../../fate-accelerated/being-
gamemaster "Being the Gamemaster" ) that the GM sets. You look at your outcome
and go from there.

But sometimes things are a little more complex.

## Challenges

A **challenge** is a series of overcome and create an advantage actions that
you use to resolve an especially complicated situation. Each overcome action
deals with one task or part of the situation, and you take the individual
results together to figure out how the situation resolves.

To set up a challenge, decide what individual tasks or goals make up the
situation, and treat each one as a separate overcome roll.

Depending on the situation, one character may be required to make several
rolls, or multiple characters may be able to participate. GMs, you aren’t
obligated to announce all the stages in the challenge ahead of time—adjust the
steps as the challenge unfolds to keep things exciting.

> The PCs are the crew of a ship caught in a storm. They decide to press on
and try to get to their destination despite the weather, and the GM suggests
this sounds like a challenge. Steps in resolving this challenge could be
calming panicky passengers, repairing damaged rigging, and keeping the ship on
the right heading.

## Contests

When two or more characters are competing against one another for the same
goal, but not directly trying to hurt each other, you have a contest. Examples
include a car chase, a public debate, or an archery tournament.

A contest proceeds in a series of exchanges. In an exchange, every participant
takes one overcome action to determine how well they do in that leg of the
contest. Compare your result to everyone else’s.

If you got the highest result, you win the exchange—you score a victory (which
you can represent with a tally or check mark on scratch paper) and describe
how you take the lead. If you succeed with style, you mark two victories.

If there’s a tie, no one gets a victory, and an unexpected twist occurs. This
could mean several things, depending on the situation—the terrain or
environment shifts somehow, the parameters of the contest change, or an
unanticipated variable shows up and affects all the participants. The GM
[creates a new situation aspect ](../../fate-accelerated/aspects-
fate-points "Aspects & Fate Points" )reflecting this change and puts it into
play.

The first participant to achieve three victories wins the contest.

## Conflicts

Conflicts are used to resolve situations where characters are trying to harm
one another. It could be physical harm (a sword fight, a wizard’s duel, a
battle with laser blasters), but it could also be mental harm (a shouting
match, a tough interrogation, a magical psychic assault).

### Conflicts: The 30-Second Version

  1. Set the scene.
  2. Determine turn order.
  3. Start the first exchange.
  4. On your turn, take an action.
  5. On other people’s turns, defend against or respond to their actions as necessary.
  6. At the end of everyone’s turn, start a new exchange or end the conflict.

### Setting the Scene

Establish what’s going on, where everyone is, and what the environment is
like. Who is the opposition? The GM should write a couple of situation aspects
on sticky notes or index cards and place them on the table. Players can
suggest situation aspects, too.

The GM also establishes **zones**, loosely defined areas that tell you where
characters are. You determine zones based on the scene and the following
guidelines:

Generally, you can interact with other characters in the same zone—or in
nearby zones if you can justify acting at a distance (for example, if you have
a ranged weapon or magic spell).

You can move one zone for free. An action is required to move if there’s an
obstacle along the way, such as someone trying to stop you, or if you want to
move two or more zones. It sometimes helps to sketch a quick map to illustrate
zones.

> Thugs are attacking the characters in a house. The living room is one zone,
the kitchen another, the front porch another, and the yard a fourth. Anyone in
the same zone can easily throw punches at each other. From the living room,
you can throw things at people in the kitchen or move into the kitchen as a
free action, unless the doorway is blocked. To get from the living room to the
front porch or yard requires an action.

### Determine Turn Order

Your turn order in a conflict is based on your approaches. In a physical
conflict, compare your Quick approach to the other participants’—the one with
the fastest reflexes goes first. In a mental conflict, compare your Careful
approach—attention to detail will warn you of danger. Whoever has the highest
approach gets to go first, and then everyone else goes in descending order.
Break ties in whatever manner makes sense, with the GM having the last word.

GMs, it’s simplest if you pick your most advantageous NPC to determine your
place in the turn order, and let all your NPCs go at that time. But if you
have a good reason to determine turn order individually for all your NPCs, go
right ahead.

### Exchanges

Next, each character takes a turn in order. On their turn, a character can
take one of the [four actions](../../fate-accelerated/how-do-stuff-
outcomes-actions-and-approaches "Outcomes, Actions, & Approaches" ). Resolve
the action to determine the outcome. The conflict is over when only one side
has characters still in the fight.

  * [« How To Do Stuff: Outcomes, Actions, and Approaches](/fate-accelerated/how-do-stuff-outcomes-actions-and-approaches)
  * [Ouch! Damage, Stress, and Consequences »](/fate-accelerated/ouch-damage-stress-and-consequences)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

