---
title: "Telling Stories Together"
---
    
Fate Accelerated

#  Telling Stories Together

So you’ve gathered your friends, your dice, and your index cards, and you’re
ready to play _Fate Accelerated Edition_ (it’ll be called FAE from now on).
Time to tell some stories!

## What Do You Mean, “Tell Stories”?

FAE is all about telling stories. You create a group of characters and follow
them through some imaginary adventure that you all take turns telling little
parts of.

Think about a movie, video game, or TV show you like where the characters go
on adventures—something like _The Legend of Korra _or_ Star Wars _or_ The
Avengers_ or the _Zelda_ games or _Doctor Who _or _The Lord of the Rings_. Now
imagine a similar sort of story, where you and your friends around the table
make the decisions for the characters as they move through the story, and the
story changes as you make those decisions.

Sometimes someone makes a decision to try something and you don’t know for
sure how it would turn out; that’s when you roll dice to see what happens
next. The higher you roll, the better the chance that things work out the way
you want them to.

## So How Do We Do It?

Well, first you need to figure out what kind of story you’re going to tell.
What genre are you interested in? Fantasy? Science fiction? Modern-day
adventure? Will you play in the world of a TV show or comic book or movie that
you love, or will you create your own world? For some great advice about how
to design the framework of your game, see [Game Creation](../../fate-
core/game-creation "Game Creation" ) in Fate Core.

Next, it’s time to choose who will be the players, and who will be the
gamemaster. Of the people around the table, all but one are referred to as
players. Each player takes on the role of one player character or PC in the
story, and puts themselves in their character’s shoes to make the decisions
that their character would make. The remaining person is called the
[gamemaster](../../fate-accelerated/being-gamemaster "Being the
Gamemaster" ) or GM. The GM’s job is to present challenges to the players and
to portray all the characters that aren’t controlled by the players (non-
player characters or NPCs).

Once you decide who the GM will be, and what the genre and framework of the
story will be, it’s time for the players to make their characters—that’s in
the [next section](../../fate-accelerated/who-do-you-want-be "Who Do
You Want To Be?" ).

### Telling Stories “Together”? What Do You Mean?

All the people at the table, GM and players alike, are responsible for telling
the story. When you make a decision for your character (or for one of the
NPCs, if you’re the GM), think about two things.

First, put yourself in your character’s shoes and think hard about what they
would do—even if it’s not the best idea. If you’re playing a character that
sometimes makes poor decisions, don’t be afraid to make a poor decision for
them on purpose.

Second—and this is really important—think about the story that’s being told.
Think about the choice that would make that story even better: more
interesting, more exciting, funnier. Would a certain choice give another
player’s character a chance to be awesome? Strongly consider making that
choice.

That’s how you tell great stories together—by not being afraid for your
character to make mistakes, and by making choices that make the story more
interesting for everyone at the table—not just you.

  * [« Get Started!](/fate-accelerated/get-started)
  * [Who Do You Want To Be? »](/fate-accelerated/who-do-you-want-be)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[FAE]: Fate Accelerated
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

