---
title: "Lore"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Lore

The Lore skill is about knowledge and education. As with some other skills, we
called it Lore because that fits the particular flavor of our examples—other
games might call it Scholarship, or Academics, or something like that.

If your game has a reason to prioritize different fields of knowledge as being
separate from one another, you might have several skills that follow the same
basic template. For example, you might have a Lore skill that’s reserved for
supernatural and arcane knowledge, and a Scholar skill for more traditional
education.

<span class="fate_font">O</span>**Overcome**: You can use Lore to overcome any
obstacle that requires applying your character’s knowledge to achieve a goal.
For example, you might roll Lore to decipher some ancient language on a tomb
wall, under the presumption that your character might have researched it at
some point.

Frankly, you can use Lore as a go-to skill any time you need to know if your
character can answer a difficult question, where some tension exists in not
knowing the answer.

<span class="fate_font">C</span>**Create an Advantage**: Like Investigate, Lore
provides a lot of very flexible opportunities to create advantages, provided
you can research the subject in question. More often than not, you’ll be using
Lore to get a story detail, some obscure bit of information that you uncover
or know already, but if that information gives you an edge in a future scene,
it might take the form of an aspect. Likewise, you can use Lore to create
advantages based on any subject matter your character might have studied,
which gives you a fun way to add details to the setting.

<span class="fate_font">A</span>**Attack**: Lore isn’t used in conflicts.

(In our examples, the magic that Zird the Arcane uses is based on Lore, so
that’s a unique exception to this—he could conceivably use Lore for magical
attacks and defenses. See the [Extras](../../fate-core/extras)
section for more details about ways to do magic and powers.)

<span class="fate_font">D</span>**Defend**: Lore isn’t used to defend.

## Lore Stunts

  * **I’ve Read about That!** You’ve read hundreds—if not thousands—of books on a wide variety of topics. You can spend a fate point to use Lore in place of any other skill for one roll or exchange, provided you can justify having read about the action you’re attempting.
  * **Shield of Reason**. You can use Lore as a defense against Provoke attempts, provided you can justify your ability to overcome your fear through rational thought and reason.
  * **Specialist**. Choose a field of specialization, such as herbology, criminology, or zoology. You get a +2 to all Lore rolls relating to that field of specialization.

  * [« Investigate](/fate-core/investigate)
  * [Notice »](/fate-core/notice)

