---
title: "The Setting’s Big Issues"
---
    
Fate Core

#  The Setting’s Big Issues

## Decide what threats and pressures inherent to the setting will spur the
protagonists to action.

Every setting needs to have something going on that the characters care about,
often a peril they want to fight or undermine. These are the setting’s issues.

You’ll come up with two issues as a group and write them down on index cards
or a [game creation worksheet](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fate-core-
downloads/) (downloadable from Evil Hat). These issues are aspects and will be
available to invoke or compel throughout the entirety of the game.

The issues should reflect the scale of your game and what the characters will
face. They’re broad ideas; they don’t just affect your characters, but many
people in the world. Issues take two forms:

  * **Current Issues:** These are problems or threats that exist in the world already, possibly for a long time. Protagonists tackling these issues are trying to change the world, to make it a better place. Examples: a corrupt regime, organized crime, rampant poverty and disease, a generations-long war.
  * **Impending Issues:** These are things that have begun to rear their ugly heads, and threaten to make the world worse if they come to pass or achieve a goal. Protagonists tackling these issues are trying to keep the world from slipping into chaos or destruction. Examples: an invasion from a neighboring country, the sudden rising of a zombie horde, the imposition of martial law.

Game and character creation involve [making aspects](../../fate-core
/making-good-aspect).

The default number of issues in a Fate game is two: Either two current issues
(for a story solely about trying to make the world a better place), two
impending issues (for a story about striving to save people from threats), or
one of each. The latter option is common in fiction: think about the stalwart
heroes who work against some impending doom while already discontent with the
world around them.

### Changing the Number of Issues

Of course, you don’t have to use the default number of two issues if you don’t
want to—one or three also works, but it will change the resulting game a bit.
A game with one issue will revolve around just that issue—a quest to rid a
city of evil, or to stop evil from happening. A game with three will show off
a busy world, one where the characters’ resources are strained against
multiple fronts. If you think you need to focus down or expand the scope of
your game, talk it over with the group and start by tweaking the number of
issues to best fit what you’re after.

> The group thinks about the sort of problems they want to deal with in the
world. Ryan immediately says “organized crime,” and they flesh that out a
little. They come up with the idea of “The Scar Triad,” a group of thugs who
are known for thievery, extortion, and other nasty things that the world could
do without. This is clearly a current issue.

>

> Lily wants the story to also be about something on the verge of happening,
something Really Bad. They come up with an impending issue: a vile cult that
seeks to summon something horrible into the world (which means they’re also
saying that their setting includes horrible, Lovecraft-inspired things). Lenny
calls it “The Doom that Is to Come,” and Ryan really likes this idea because
it gives his bookish character a hook into things going on in the world.

### Issues

  1. The Scar Triad
  2. The Doom that is To Come

## Making the Issues into Aspects

As said earlier, issues are aspects. Turn the ideas you have into aspects that
you could conceivably use at different times in the story (often as compels to
the protagonists or as invocations for foes, but clever players will always
find other uses for aspects). Write them down, and then if you need to add a
little bit to remember the context or some details, write those down alongside
the aspects.

> Amanda writes down <span class="aspect">The Scar Triad</span> and <span class="aspect">The
Doom that Is to Come</span> as two game aspects. She notes down next to The
Scar Triad, “They’re into racketeering and other nasty stuff.” And with The
Doom that Is to Come, “Led by the Cult of Tranquility.”

### *The Scar Triad

They’re into racketeering and other nasty stuff.

### *The Doom that Is to Come

Led by the Cult of Tranquility.

If you’re new to making aspects, hold off on this for now. You’ll get quite a
bit of practice making aspects for your characters. Once you’re done with
character creation, turn these issue ideas into aspects.

### Changing Issues In Play

[The Long Game](../../fate-core/long-game) section will talk about
this in detail, but issues can change as the game progresses. Sometimes, the
issue evolves into something new. Sometimes, the characters will successfully
fight against it, and it’ll be gone. And sometimes, new issues will emerge. So
the ones you make are just what you’re starting off with.

## Drilling Down

You can also use issues to flesh out smaller, but nonetheless important pieces
of your setting. An important location (a major city or nation, or even a
memorable local restaurant) or organization (a knightly order, a king’s court,
or a corporation) can have impending and/or current issues as well.

It is recommended that you start by giving only one issue to each setting
element, just to keep things from getting too bogged down, but you can always
add more as the campaign progresses. Likewise, you don’t have to do this right
now—if you find a setting element becoming more important later in the game,
you can give it issues then.

> The Cult of Tranquility keeps popping up in pre-game discussions, so the
group decides that it also needs an issue. After some discussion, the group
decides it’d be interesting if there was some tension in the cult’s ranks, and
makes a current issue called “Two Conflicting Prophecies”—different branches
of the cult have different ideas of what the doom is going to be.

### The Cult of Tranquility

Issue—Two Conflicting Prophecies

  * [« A Game’s Scale](/fate-core/game%E2%80%99s-scale)
  * [Faces &amp; Places »](/fate-core/faces-places)

