---
title: "Advancement &amp; Change"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Advancement &amp; Change

Your characters aren’t going to remain static through the entire campaign. As
their stories play out, they’ll have the chance to grow and change in response
to the events that happen in play. The conflicts they face and the
complications they overcome will alter your sense of who they are and push
them toward new challenges.

In addition to your characters, the game world will change also. You’ll
resolve threats as you play, or change the face of a location, or make such an
impact on the world that one of the issues may need to change.

Character advancement in Fate comes in one of two flavors: either you can
change something on your sheet to something else that’s equivalent, or you can
add new things to your sheet. The opportunities you get to do this are
collectively called milestones.

## Defining Milestones

A milestone is a moment during the game where you have the chance to change or
advance your character. They are called milestones because they usually happen
at significant “break points” in the action of a game—[the end of a session,
the end of a scenario, and the end of a story arc](../../fate-core
/scenes-sessions-scenarios "Scenes, Sessions, & Scenarios" ), respectively.

Usually, those break points immediately follow some significant event in the
story that justifies your character changing in response to events. You might
reveal a significant plot detail or have a cliffhanger at the end of a
session. You might defeat a major villain or resolve a plotline at the end of
a scenario. You might resolve a major storyline that shakes up the campaign
world at the end of an arc.

Obviously, things won’t always line up that nicely, so GMs, you have some
discretion in deciding when a certain level of milestone occurs. If it seems
satisfying to give out a milestone in the middle of a session, go ahead, but
stick to the guidelines here to keep from handing out too many advancement
opportunities too often.

Milestones come in three levels of importance: minor, significant, and major.

### Minor Milestones

Minor milestones usually occur at the end of a session of play, or when one
piece of a story has been resolved. These kinds of milestones are more about
changing your character rather than making him or her more powerful, about
adjusting in response to whatever’s going on in the story if you need to.
Sometimes it won’t really make sense to take advantage of a minor milestone,
but you always have the opportunity if you should need to.

During a minor milestone, you can choose to do one (and only one) of the
following:

  * Switch the rank values of any two skills, or replace one Average (+1) skill with one that isn’t on your sheet.
  * Change any single stunt for another stunt.
  * Purchase a new stunt, provided you have the refresh to do so. (Remember, you can’t go below 1 refresh.)
  * Rename one character aspect that isn’t your high concept.

In addition, you can also rename any [moderate consequences](../..
/fate-core/conflicts "Conflicts" ) you have, so that you can start them on the
road to recovery, presuming you have not already done so.

This is a good way to make slight character adjustments, if it seems like
something on your character isn’t quite right—you don’t end up using that
stunt as often as you thought, or you resolved the _Blood Feud with Edmund_
that you had and thus it’s no longer appropriate, or any of those changes that
keep your character consistent with the events of play.

In fact, you should almost always be able to justify the change you’re making
in terms of the game’s story. You shouldn’t be able to change _Hot Temper_ to
_Staunch Pacifist_, for example, unless something happened in the story to
inspire a serious change of heart—you met a holy man, or had a traumatic
experience that made you want to give up the sword, or whatever. GMs, you’re
the final arbiter on this, but don’t be so much of a stickler that you
sacrifice a player’s fun for consistency.

> Cynere gets a minor milestone. Lily looks over her character sheet, to see
if there’s anything she wants to change. One thing that sticks out to her is
that during the last session, Zird has been scheming behind her back a lot and
putting her in a bad position.

>

> She looks over at Ryan and says, “You know what? I have this aspect,
<span class="aspect">I’ve Got Zird’s Back</span>. I think I need to change that in
light of current circumstances, and call it, <span class="aspect">I Know Zird is Up to
Something</span>.”

>

> Ryan says, “Seriously? I mean, it’s not like he does it all the time.”

>

> Lily grins. “Well, when he stops, I can change it back.”

>

> Amanda approves the change, and Lily rewrites one of Cynere’s aspects.

>

> Meanwhile, Landon also gets a minor milestone. Lenny looks over his sheet,
and notices that he spends a lot more time lying to people than he does trying
to make friends with them. He asks Amanda if he can swap the ranks of his
Deceive and his Rapport skill, giving him Good (+3) Deceive and Fair (+2)
Rapport. She agrees, and he notes the new skill totals on his character sheet.

## Significant Milestones

Significant milestones usually occur at the end of a scenario or the
conclusion of a big plot event (or, when in doubt, at the end of every two or
three sessions). Unlike minor milestones, which are primarily about change,
significant milestones are about learning new things—dealing with problems and
challenges has made your character generally more capable at what they do.

In addition to the benefit of a minor milestone, you also gain both of the
following:

  * One additional skill point, which you can spend to buy a new skill at Average (+1) or increase an existing skill by one rank.
  * If you have any severe consequences, you can rename them to begin the recovery process, if you haven’t already.

When you spend your skill point, it’s worth one step on the ladder. You can
use it to buy a new skill at Average (+1), or you can use it to increase an
existing skill by one step on the ladder—say, from Good (+3) to Great (+4).

### Skill Columns

During character creation, you organized your skills into a pyramid. You don’t
have to stick to that for character advancement.

However, there’s still a limitation you have to deal with, **skill columns**.
This means you **can’t have more skills at a certain rank than you have at the
rank below it**. So if you have three Good columns, you have at least three
Average (+1) skills and at least three Fair (+2) skills to support your three
Good (+3) skills.

The pyramid follows this rule already, but when you’re adding skills, you need
to make sure you don’t violate that limit. It’s easy to forget that if you use
a skill point to upgrade one of your own skills, you might suddenly not have
enough skills to “support” it at the new rank.

So, let’s say you have one Good (+3), two Fair (+2), and three Average (+1)
skills. Your skill distribution looks roughly like this:

![](../../sites/default/files/pyramid.png)

At a milestone, you want to upgrade a Fair (+2) skill to Good (+3). That’d
give you two Good (+3), one Fair (+2), and three Average (+1):

![](../../sites/default/files/pyramid-wrong.png)

You see how that doesn’t work? You’re now missing the second Fair skill you’d
need to be square with the rules.

When this happens, you have one of two options. You can buy a new skill at the
lowest possible rank—in this case, Average (+1)—and then upgrade it in
subsequent milestones until you’re in a position to bump the skill you want to
the appropriate level. Or you can “bank” the skill point, not spend it now,
and wait until you’ve accumulated enough to buy a skill at whatever rank you
need to support the move.

So in the case above, you could buy an Average (+1) skill, promote one of your
Average skills to a Fair (+2), then bump the original skill up to Good (+3).
That would take three significant or major milestones to do. Or, you could
wait, bank up three skill points, buy a new skill at Fair (+2), then bump the
original skill up to Good (+3). It just depends on whether you want to put new
stuff on your sheet or not in the interim.

> Zird gets a significant milestone after the end of a scenario. He gains an
additional skill point.

>

> Ryan looks at his character sheet, and decides he wants to take his Notice
up from Fair (+2) to Good (+3). He knows that’s going to screw him up with the
rules, though, so instead, he decides to take Resources at Average (+1)—the
PCs have been on a few lucrative adventures lately, and he figures that’s his
opportunity to create a sense of stable wealth.

>

> If he waits two more milestones, he’ll be able to put one of his Average
skills at Fair (+2), and then bump his Notice up to Good (+3) like he
originally wanted.

>

> He also has the opportunity to take one of the benefits from a minor
milestone. He has been in a lot of fights this game so far, and feels like his
Not the Face! is getting old, considering the number of times his character
has been hit in the face. He replaces it with Hit Me, and There Will Be
Consequences, to reflect his changing attitude about the violence he
encounters.

GMs, strictly enforcing how the skills work can be a pain in the ass
sometimes. If you and the players really want to be able to upgrade a certain
skill in a way that breaks the rules now, simply ask that the player spend the
next few milestones “correcting” their skill spread, rather than making them
wait. It’s okay. No one will come after you.

You might notice that this means that the further you get up the ladder, the
harder it is to quickly advance your skills. This is intentional—no one is
going to be able to get to the point where they’re awesome at everything, all
the time. That’s boring.

## Major Milestones

A major milestone should only occur when something happens in the campaign
that shakes it up a lot—the end of a story arc (or around three scenarios),
the death of a main NPC villain, or any other large-scale change that
reverberates around your game world.

These milestones are about gaining more power. The challenges of yesterday
simply aren’t sufficient to threaten these characters anymore, and the threats
of tomorrow will need to be more adept, organized, and determined to stand
against them in the future.

Achieving a major milestone confers the benefits of a significant milestone
and a minor milestone, and all of the following additional options:

  * If you have an extreme consequence, rename it to reflect that you’ve moved past its most debilitating effects. This allows you to take another extreme consequence in the future, if you desire.
  * Take an additional point of refresh, which allows you to immediately buy a new stunt or keep it in order to give yourself more fate points at the beginning of a session.
  * Advance a skill beyond the campaign’s current skill cap, if you’re able to, thus increasing the skill cap.
  * Rename your character’s high concept if you desire.

Reaching a major milestone is a pretty big deal. Characters with more stunts
are going to have a diverse range of bonuses, making their skills much more
effective by default. Characters with higher refresh will have a much larger
fountain of fate points to work with when sessions begin, which means they’ll
be less reliant on compels for a while.

GMs, when the player characters go past the skill cap, it will necessarily
change the way [you make opposition NPCs](../../fate-core/creating-
and-playing-opposition "Creating the Opposition" ), because you’re going to
need foes who can match the PCs in terms of base competence so as to provide a
worthy challenge. It won’t happen all at once, which will give you the chance
to introduce more powerful enemies gradually, but if you play long enough,
eventually you’re going to have PCs who have Epic and Legendary skill
ratings—that alone should give you a sense of what kind of villains you’ll
need to bring to get in their way.

Most of all, a major milestone should signal that lots of things in the world
of your game have changed. Some of that will probably be reflected in world
advancement, but given the number of chances the PCs have had to revise their
aspects in response to the story, you could be looking at a group with a much
different set of priorities and concerns than they had when they started.

> Cynere reaches the end of a long story arc and is awarded a major milestone.
In the game, the PCs have just accomplished the overthrow of Barathar,
Smuggler Queen of the Sindral Reach, which leaves an enormous power vacuum in
the game world.

>

> Lily looks at her character sheet. She took an extreme consequence in the
past arc of scenarios, and allowed one of her aspects to get replaced with the
aspect <span class="aspect">Soul-Burned by the Demon Arc’yeth</span>. She now has the
opportunity to rename that aspect again, and she decides to call it
<span class="aspect">I Must Kill Arc’yeth’s Kind</span>—she hasn’t quite escaped the
scars of the experience, but it’s better than where she was, given that her
aims are now proactive.

>

> She also gets an additional point of refresh. She asks Amanda whether or not
she can turn her experience with Arc’yeth into something that will allow her
to fight demons in the future. Amanda sees no reason to object, and Lily
decides to buy a stunt on the spot.

>

> “Demon-Slayer: +2 to the use of the Warmaster stunt, when she chooses to use
it against any demon or any demonic servitor.”

>

> Lily records the new stunt on Cynere’s character sheet, and rewrites the
appropriate aspect.

>

> Zird the Arcane also gets a major milestone. Ryan looks over his character
sheet, and realizes that he’s in a position to advance his peak skill, Lore,
to Superb (+5). He does so, and Amanda makes a note that she needs to make any
wizardly enemies Zird might encounter that much more powerful, just to get his
attention.

>

> Finally, Landon also reaches a major milestone. Recently in the plot, Landon
discovered that the Ivory Shroud was much more than a martial arts
society—they’ve been secret political movers and shakers for a long time, and
recently supported Barathar in her efforts to control the Reach.

>

> In response to this, Lenny decides to alter his high concept slightly to
<span class="aspect">Former Ivory Shroud Disciple</span>, indicating his desire to
distance himself from the order. Amanda tells him that the Shroud isn’t going
to take his defection well.

>

> So we have Cynere with a new appetite for killing demons, Zird reaching a
heretofore unseen level of power, and Landon questioning his loyalty to his
only real source of discipline. Amanda makes a lot of notes about what this
means for the next few scenarios.

### Back to Character Creation

One way of looking at a major milestone is that it’s the equivalent of a
season finale in a television show. Once you start the next session, a lot of
things have the potential to be fundamentally different about your game—you
might be focused on new problems, several characters will have aspects
changed, there will be new threats in the setting, and so on.

When that happens, you might decide that it’s a worthwhile endeavor to take a
session to sit down like you did at character creation and review all the PCs
again, altering or adjusting anything that seems like it might need
revision—new skill configurations, a new set of stunts, more changes to
aspects, etc. You may also want to examine the issues in your game and make
sure they’re still appropriate, revise location aspects, or anything else that
seems necessary to move your game forward.

So long as you keep them at the same level of refresh and skill points they
had, reconvening like this might be exactly what you need to make sure
everyone’s still on the same page about the game. And GMs, remember—the more
you give the players a chance to actively invest in the game world, the more
it’ll pay off for you when you’re running the game.

  * [« Building A Campaign](/fate-core/building-campaign)
  * [World Advancement »](/fate-core/world-advancement)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

