---
title: "Actions &amp; Outcomes"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Actions &amp; Outcomes

## It's Time For Action!

You roll the dice when there’s some kind of interesting opposition keeping you
from achieving your goals. If there’s no interesting opposition, you just
accomplish whatever you say you’re trying to do.

As said previously, characters in a Fate game solve their problems
proactively. Players, during the game you’re going to do a lot—you might break
into the bad guy’s fortress, pilot a starship past a minefield, rally a group
of people into a protest, or poll a network of informants to get the latest
word on the street.

Whenever you take action, there’s a good chance that something or someone is
going to be in your way. It wouldn’t be an interesting story if the bad guy
just rolled over and handed you victory on a plate—clearly, he’s got some
crazy security measures to keep you out of his place. Or the mines are
unstable and already blowing up around you. Or the protesters are really
scared of the cops. Or someone’s been bribing the informants to keep quiet.

That’s when it’s time to take out the dice.

  * Choose the character’s skill that is appropriate to the [action](../../fate-core/taking-action-dice-ladder).
  * Roll four Fate dice.
  * Add together the symbols showing on the dice. A <span class="fate_font">+</span> is +1, a <span class="fate_font">-</span> is –1, and a <span class="fate_font">0</span> is 0.
  * Add your skill rating to the dice roll. The total is your result on the ladder.
  * If you invoke an aspect, add +2 to your result or reroll the dice.

> Cynere needs to bribe her way past the guards keeping her from entering the
city of Thaalar. Amanda says she’ll do this as a straight-up overcome action,
because the guards are nameless NPCs anyway and not really worth a [conflict
](../../fate-core/conflicts).

>

> Lily looks through Cynere’s skill list and picks Resources as her skill,
hoping she can scrounge enough out of her coin purse to satisfy them. Her
Resources skill is Average (+1), so she’ll add one to whatever result she gets
from rolling the dice.

>

> She rolls and gets: <span class="fate_font">+-0+</span>

>

> Her total result is +2 (+1 from her dice and +1 from her skill of Average),
which corresponds to a Fair on the ladder.

## Opposition

As said in [The Basics](../../fate-core/basics), whenever you roll
the dice, you’re comparing your roll to your opposition. Opposition is either
active, meaning it’s another person rolling dice against you, or passive,
meaning that it’s just a set rating on the ladder which represents the
influence of the environment or situation you’re in. GMs, it’s your job to
decide what the most reasonable source of opposition is.

Amanda decides to roll active opposition against Lily on behalf of the guards.
She decides the most appropriate opposing skill is Will—they’re trying to
resist the temptation of bribery, after all.

The guards are nameless NPCs with no reason to be particularly strong of will,
so she gives them a Mediocre (+0). She rolls and gets:
<span class="fate_font">++0+</span>

...for an incredibly lucky result of +3!

That gives her a Good (+3) result, beating Lily’s roll by one.

### For the GM: Active or Passive?

If a PC or a named NPC can reasonably interfere with whatever the action is,
then you should give them the opportunity to roll active opposition. This does
not count as an action for the opposing character; it’s just a basic property
of resolving actions. In other words, a player doesn’t have to do anything
special to earn the right to actively oppose an action, as long as the
character is present and can interfere. If there’s any doubt, having an
appropriate situation aspect helps justify why a character gets to actively
oppose someone else.

If there is no character in the way, then look at your situation aspects in
this scene to see if any of them justify some sort of obstacle, or consider
the circumstances (like rough terrain, a complex lock, time running out, a
situational complication, etc.). If something sounds interesting, choose
passive opposition and set a rating on the ladder.

Sometimes you’re going to run into edge cases, where something inanimate seems
like it should provide active opposition (like an automated gun) or an NPC
can’t provide proactive resistance (like if they’re unaware of what the PC is
doing). Follow your gut—use the type of opposition that fits the circumstances
or makes the scene more interesting.

  * [« Will](/fate-core/will)
  * [Four Outcomes »](/fate-core/four-outcomes)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

