---
title: "Running the Game"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Running the Game

## What the Gamemaster Does

If you’re the gamemaster, then your job is a little different from everyone
else’s. This section is going to give you a bunch of tools to make that job
easier during play.

The GM’s job was discussed a bit in [The Basics](../../fate-
core/basics), but let’s take a more detailed look at your unique
responsibilities.

## Start and End Scenes

One of your primary responsibilities during the game is to decide definitively
when a scene begins and ends. This might not seem like that big a deal, but it
is, because it means that you’re the person primarily responsible for the
pacing of each session. If you start scenes too early, it takes a long time to
get to the main action. If you don’t end them soon enough, then they drag on
and it takes you a long time to get anything significant done.

The players will sometimes help you with this, if they’re keen on getting to
the next bit of action, but sometimes they’ll naturally be inclined to spend
too much time bantering in character or focusing on minutiae. When that
happens, it’s your job to step in like a good movie editor and say, “I think
we’ve pretty much milked this scene for all it’s worth. What do we want to do
next?”

We have more advice on starting and ending scenes in the next section,
[Scenes, Sessions, and Scenarios](../../fate-core/scenes-sessions-
scenarios "Scenes, Sessions, & Scenarios" ).

### Drama Is Better Than Realism

In Fate, don’t get too bogged down trying to maintain absolute consistency in
the world or adhere to a draconian sense of realism. The game operates by the
rules of drama and fiction; use that to your advantage. There should be very
few moments in the game where the PCs are free of conflicts or problems to
deal with, even if it’d be more “realistic” for them to get a long breather.

When you’re trying to decide what happens, and the answer that makes the most
sense is also kind of boring, go with something that’s more exciting than
sensible! You can always find a way later on to justify something that doesn’t
make immediate sense.

## Play the World and the NPCs

As the gamemaster, it’s your job to decide how everyone and everything else in
the world responds to what the PCs do, as well as what the PCs’ environment is
like. If a PC botches a roll, you’re the one who gets to decide the
consequences. When an NPC attempts to assassinate a PC’s friend, you’re the
one who gets to decide how they go about it. When the PCs stroll up to a food
vendor in a market, you get to decide what kind of day the vendor is having,
what kind of personality he or she has, what’s on sale that day. You determine
the weather when the PCs pull up to that dark cave.

Fortunately, you don’t have to do this in a vacuum—you have a lot of tools to
help you decide what would be appropriate. The process we outline in [Game
Creation](../../fate-core/game-creation) should provide you with a
lot of context about the game you’re running, whether that’s in the form of
aspects like current and impending issues, specific locations that you might
visit, or NPCs with strong agendas that you can use.

The PCs’ aspects also help you decide how to make the world respond to them.
As stated in the Aspects and Fate Points section, the [best aspects have a
double edge](../../fate-core/making-good-aspect "Making A Good
Aspect" ) to them. You have a lot of power to exploit that double edge by
using event-based compels. That way, you kill two birds with one stone—you add
detail and surprise to your game world, but you also keep the PCs at the
center of the story you’re telling.

This facet of your job also means that when you have NPCs in a scene, you
speak for and make decisions for them like the players do for their PCs—you
decide when they’re taking an action that requires dice, and you follow the
same rules the players do for determining how that turns out. Your NPCs are
going to be a little different than the PCs, however, depending on how
important they are to the story.

### Let the Players Help You

You don’t have to shoulder the whole burden of making up world details
yourself. Remember, the more collaborative you get, the more emotional
investment the players are going to have in the result, because they shared in
its creation.

If a character has an aspect that connects them to someone or something in the
world, make that player your resident “expert” on whatever the aspect refers
to. So if someone has <span class="aspect">Scars from the Great War</span>, poll that
player for information whenever the Great War comes up in conversation. “You
notice that this sergeant is wearing a veteran’s mark, which is a rare
decoration from the War. What hardcore crap do you have to do to get one of
those? Do you have one?” Some players will defer back to you, and that’s fine,
but it’s important that you keep making the offer so as to foster a
collaborative atmosphere.

Also, one of the main uses of the [create an advantage action](../..
/fate-core/four-actions) is precisely to give players a way to add details to
the world through their characters. Use that to your advantage when you draw a
blank or simply want to delegate more control. One good way to do this during
play is to answer the player’s question with a question, if they ask for
information.

Ryan: “Is there a way to disrupt this magical construct without killing the
subjects trapped in it?”

Amanda: “Well, you know that it’s using their life force to power itself. If
there were a way to do that, what do you think it’d look like? I mean, you’re
the expert wizard, you tell me.”

Ryan: “Hm... I think there’d be some kind of counter-incantation, like a
failsafe mechanism in case things go horribly wrong.”

Amanda: "Yeah, that sounds good. Roll Lore to see if that's there."

## Judge the Use of the Rules

It’s also your job to make most of the moment-to-moment decisions about what’s
legit and what’s not regarding the rules. Most often, you’re going to decide
when something in the game deserves a roll, what type of action that is
(overcome, attack, etc.) and how difficult that roll is. In conflicts, this
can get a little more complicated, like determining if a situation aspect
should force someone to make an overcome action, or deciding whether or not a
player can justify a particular advantage they’re trying to create.

You also judge the appropriateness of any invocations or compels that come up
during play, like we talked about in the [Aspects and Fate Points ](../../fate-core/aspects-fate-points "Aspects and Fate Points" )section, and
make sure that everyone at the table is clear on what’s going on. With
invocations, this is pretty easy—as long as the player can explain why the
aspect is relevant, you’re good to go. With compels, it can get a little more
complicated, because you need to articulate precisely what complication the
player is agreeing to.

We provide some more tips on judging the use of rules below.

### You're the Chairman, Not God

Approach your position as arbiter of the rules by thinking of yourself as
“first among equals” in a committee, rather than as an absolute authority. If
there’s a disagreement on the use of the rules, try encouraging a brief
discussion and let everyone talk freely, rather than making a unilateral
decision. A lot of times, you’ll find that the group is self-policing—if
someone tries to throw out a compel that’s a real stretch, it’s just as likely
that another player will bring it up before you do.

Your job is really to have the “last word” on any rules-related subject,
rather than to dictate from your chair. Keep that in mind.

## Create Scenarios (and Nearly Everything Else)

Finally, you’re responsible for making all of the stuff that the PCs encounter
and react to in the game. That not only includes NPCs with skills and aspects,
but it also includes the aspects on scenes, environments, and objects, as well
as the dilemmas and challenges that make up a scenario of Fate. You provide
the prompts that give your group a reason to play this game to begin with—what
problems they face, what issues they have to resolve, whom they’re opposing,
and what they’ll have to go through in order to win the day.

This job gets a whole section all on its own. See [Scenes, Sessions, and
Scenarios](../../fate-core/scenes-sessions-scenarios).

  * [« Teamwork](/fate-core/teamwork)
  * [What To Do During Game Creation »](/fate-core/what-do-during-game-creation)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

