---
title: "Types of Aspects"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Types of Aspects

Every game of Fate has a few different kinds of aspects: game aspects,
character aspects, situation aspects, consequences, and boosts. They mainly
differ from one another in terms of what they’re attached to and how long they
last.

## Game Aspects

Game aspects are permanent fixtures of the game, hence the name. While they
might change over time, they’re never going to go away. If you’ve already gone
through game creation, you’ve already defined these—[the current or impending
issues](../../fate-core/setting%E2%80%99s-big-issues) that you came
up with. They describe problems or threats that exist in the world, which are
going to be the basis for your game’s story.

Everyone can invoke, compel, or create an advantage on a game aspect at any
time; they’re always there and available for anyone’s use.

## Character Aspects

Character aspects are just as permanent, but smaller in scope, attached to an
individual PC or NPC. They describe a near-infinite number of things that set
the character apart, such as:

  * Significant personality traits or beliefs (<span class="aspect">Sucker for a Pretty Face</span>, <span class="aspect">Never Leave a Man Behind</span>, <span class="aspect">The Only Good Tsyntavian Is a Dead Tsyntavian</span>).
  * The character’s background or profession (<span class="aspect">Educated at the Academy of Blades</span>, <span class="aspect">Born a Spacer</span>, <span class="aspect">Cybernetic Street Thief</span>).
  * An important possession or noticeable feature (<span class="aspect">My Father’s Bloodstained Sword</span>, <span class="aspect">Dressed to the Nines</span>, <span class="aspect">Sharp Eyed Veteran</span>).
  * Relationships to people and organizations (<span class="aspect">In League with the Twisting Hand</span>, <span class="aspect">The King’s Favor</span>, <span class="aspect">Proud Member of the Company of Lords</span>).
  * Problems, goals, or issues the character is dealing with (<span class="aspect">A Price on My Head</span>, <span class="aspect">The King Must Die</span>, <span class="aspect">Fear of Heights</span>).
  * Titles, reputations, or obligations the character may have (<span class="aspect">Self-Important Merchant Guildmaster</span>, <span class="aspect">Silver-Tongued Scoundrel</span>, <span class="aspect">Honor-Bound to Avenge My Brother</span>).

You can invoke or call for a compel on any of your character aspects whenever
they’re relevant. GMs, you can always propose compels to any PC. Players, you
can suggest compels for other people’s characters, but the GM is always going
to get the final say on whether or not it’s a valid suggestion.

## Situation Aspects

A situation aspect is temporary, intended to last only for a single scene or
until it no longer makes sense (but no longer than a session, at most).
Situation aspects can be attached to the environment the scene takes place
in—which affects everybody in the scene—but you can also attach them to
specific characters by targeting them when you [create an advantage](../../fate-core/four-actions "Create An Advantage" ).

Situation aspects describe significant features of the circumstances the
characters are dealing with in a scene. That includes:

  * Physical features of the environment (<span class="aspect">Dense Underbrush</span>, <span class="aspect">Obscuring Snowdrifts</span>, <span class="aspect">Low Gravity Planet</span>).
  * Positioning or placement (<span class="aspect">Sniper’s Perch</span>, <span class="aspect">In the Trees</span>, <span class="aspect">Backyard</span>).
  * Immediate obstacles (<span class="aspect">Burning Barn</span>, <span class="aspect">Tricky Lock</span>, <span class="aspect">Yawning Chasm</span>).
  * Contextual details that are likely to come into play (<span class="aspect">Disgruntled Townsfolk</span>, <span class="aspect">Security Cameras</span>, <span class="aspect">Loud Machinery</span>).
  * Sudden changes in a character’s status (<span class="aspect">Sand in the Eyes</span>, <span class="aspect">Disarmed</span>, <span class="aspect">Cornered</span>, <span class="aspect">Covered in Slime</span>).

Who can use a situation aspect depends a lot on narrative context—sometimes
it’ll be very clear, and sometimes you’ll need to justify how you’re using the
aspect to make sense based on what’s happening in the scene. GMs, you’re the
final arbiter on what claims on an aspect are valid.

Sometimes situation aspects become obstacles that characters need to [overcome
](../../fate-core/four-actions "Overcome" ). Other times they give
you justification to provide active opposition against someone else’s action.

## Consequences

A consequence is more permanent than a situation aspect, but not quite as
permanent as a character aspect. They’re a special kind of aspect you take in
order to avoid getting taken out in a conflict, and they describe lasting
injuries or problems that you take away from a [conflict](../../fate-
core/conflicts "Conflict" ) (<span class="aspect">Dislocated Shoulder</span>,
<span class="aspect">Bloody Nose</span>, <span class="aspect">Social Pariah</span>).

Consequences stick around for a variable length of time, from a few scenes to
a scenario or two, depending on how severe they are. Because of their negative
phrasing, you’re likely to get compelled a lot when you have them, and anyone
who can justifiably benefit from the consequence can invoke it or create an
advantage on it.

## Boosts

Boosts are a super-transient kind of aspect. You get a boost when you’re
trying to create an advantage but don’t succeed well enough, or as an added
benefit to succeeding especially well at an action. You get to invoke them for
free, but as soon as you do, the aspect goes away.

If you want, you can also allow another character to invoke your boost, if
it’s relevant and could help them out.

### A Clarification About Boosts from Ryan Macklin and Leonard Balsera

The following was [posted on Ryan Macklin's Web
site](http://ryanmacklin.com/2014/01/fate-boosts-revisited/) for clearer
language that shows the intent and utility of Boosts. The article also
includes a bit of design history about boosts.

#### Boosts

Boosts are temporary, free-floating invocations that happen when you get a
momentary benefit that isn’t lasting enough to be an aspect. You get a boost
when you’re trying to create an advantage but don’t succeed well enough, or as
an added benefit to succeeding especially well at an action (notably
defending). You invoke boosts just like you would for an aspect, for the +2,
reroll, or other effect that a free invoke can do. As with aspect invocations,
you need to describe what’s happening that makes that boost relevant to your
action.

Once you invoke the boost, it goes away. They go away on their own fairly
quickly—usually after the next action when you could use them—so use them as
soon as possible! If you want, you can allow another character to invoke your
boost, though it needs to be relevant to their action and could help them out.

When you earn a boost, give it a name like you would an aspect to help you
remember where the boost came from and how you can use it. Don’t dwell on
coming up with something clever, since it doesn’t last long.

Just remember that a boost isn’t a full, “grown up” aspect—you can’t compel
with it, use it as permission for extras, pay a fate point to invoke it again,
or other things that manipulate aspects or that aspects affect. But you can
promote it to a full aspect; see Promoting Boosts below.​

#### Leaving Boosts Unnamed

If you’re struggling to name a boost, let it be unnamed and continue
playing—boosts aren’t worth stopping play to name! If you do, though, you’ll
have to keep track of the situation that created the boost, which some people
find difficult to remember.

#### Promoting Boosts

Sometimes when you’re creating a new aspect, you find that there’s a boost in
play that’s exactly the aspect you want to make, turning a momentary benefit
into a lasting one. Great! That’s called promoting a boost. Just declare an
aspect you’re making to have the same name as a boost in play, and you’re
done. If the action gives this new aspect a free invocation, it has two
instead thanks to the boost being active. If you haven’t named the boost yet,
now’s the time to do it.

For example, say you parry my sword strike and get a boost from that defend
action, and we say that you managed to get me <span class="aspect">A Little Off-
Balance</span>. On your next action, you follow-up by saying that you want to
keep me off-balance by creating an advantage. You roll for the advantage,
succeed without needing to use the boost, and then name the advantage
<span class="aspect">A Little Off-Balance</span> with two free invocations (or three
if you succeeded with style—essentially one extra free invocation).

Even if you’ve used a boost already, nothing says you can’t bring that idea
back around as an aspect later in the scene if it’s appropriate. There’s no
special rule about that, just something to keep in mind. In our example above,
you could still create the <span class="aspect">A Little Off-Balance</span> advantage,
even if you use the boost on that roll or on a past turn.

#### Remember that Boosts are not Aspects

Unlike aspects, you cannot compel a boost or pay a fate point to invoke a
boost (including [invoking it against its owner](../../fate-core
/fate-point-economy#earning-fate-points)). Any other rules that require an
aspect to exist or be used don’t count for boosts. Don’t let the fact that
they’re often given names mislead you.

#### Attribution of this text

“Fate Boosts Revisited” from [ryanmacklin.com](http://ryanmacklin.com/2014/01
/fate-boosts-revisited/) © 2014 Leonard Balsera and Ryan Macklin.

  * [« Aspects &amp; Fate Points](/fate-core/aspects-fate-points)
  * [What Aspects Do »](/fate-core/what-aspects-do)

  *[GM]: Game Master
  *[NPC]: Non-Player Character
  *[PC]: Player Character

