---
title: "Zones"
---
    
Fate System Toolkit

#  Zones

Using zone maps during conflicts breaks up the physical space of a fight,
giving characters with high Athletics and Physique scores the opportunity to
dominate the battlefield. Here are a few ideas to make zones an exciting part
of your game:

## Moving Through Zones

In games with quite a few zones, you may want to allow characters to sacrifice
their turn in order to move a number of zones equal to their Athletics or to
remove a number of physical obstacles equal to their Physique. Fast and strong
characters want to be fast and strong, but rolling dice isn’t always the best
way to represent that in Fate.

## Tight Zones Can Create Drama

While zones divide up big areas like parking lots and stadiums—showing how
difficult it is to run across a football field quickly—they can also be used
to divide up small areas in interesting ways. For example, a fight on a ship
might take place in tight quarters that require allies to cross several zones
in order to offer support to a friend in trouble. By forcing players to choose
between spending actions on moving or offering help from afar, zones can make
ordinary conflicts dramatic.

## Dangerous Zone Aspects

Zones can also create drama by restricting movement and providing threats the
characters have to overcome. For example, a zone on a battlefield might have
the aspect <span class="aspect">Taking Heavy Fire</span>, requiring characters to make
an Athletics roll to avoid taking damage as they run through the firefight.
Some zones might also disappear after a specified number of turns. Collapsing
bridges, sinking ships, and closing doors all push characters to move quickly
as the battlefield shifts around them and give the players a chance to force
NPCs into those zones to contend with the threats as well.

## Mental or Social Zones

Not all conflicts happen in the physical world; Fate characters are often
drawn into social or mental conflicts that can be mapped out in interesting
ways. For example, a psychic surgeon may find her way through a patient’s
dreamscape blocked by situation aspects that must be overcome though a series
of Investigation and Empathy rolls. The zones could detail the obstacles that
are keeping the patient from accessing old memories, traces of trauma and
abuse that the PCs must punch through before they help the patient overcome
his or her past. Similarly, a GM might detail several different social groups
in a high school, indicating which groups the PCs have to impress before they
can gain access to the more popular students. In essence, these mental and
social zones serve to constrain the players, directing them toward conflicts
by limiting their movement.

  * [« Consequences](/fate-system-toolkit/consequences)
  * [Refresh »](/fate-system-toolkit/refresh)

