---
title: "Skills &amp; Stunts"
---
    
Fate Core

#  Skills &amp; Stunts

## Defining Skills

A **skill** is a word that describes a broad family of competency at
something—such as [Athletics](../../fate-core/athletics), [Fight
](../../fate-core/fight), or [Deceive](../../fate-
core/deceive)—which your character might have gained through innate talent,
training, or years of trial and error. Skills are the basis for everything
your character actually does in the game that involves challenge and chance
(and dice).

Skills are rated on the adjective [ladder](../../fate-core/taking-
action-dice-ladder "The Ladder" ). The higher the rating, the better your
character is at the skill. Taken together, your list of skills gives you a
picture of that character’s potential for action at a glance—what you’re best
at, what you’re okay at, and what you’re not so good at.

We define skills in two ways in Fate—in terms of the _game actions_ that you
can do with them, and the _context_ in which you can use them. There are only
a handful of basic game actions, but the number of potential contexts is
infinite.

## The Basic Game Actions

We cover these in more detail in [Actions and Outcomes](../../fate-
core/actions-outcomes "Actions & Outcomes" ), but here’s a quick reference so
that you don’t have to flip all the way over there right now.

**Overcome:** True to its name, you tackle some kind of challenge, engaging task, or hindrance related to your skill.

**Create an Advantage:** Whether you’re discovering something that already exists about an opponent or creating a situation that helps you succeed, creating advantages allows you to discover and create aspects, and lets you get free invocations of them.

**Attack:** You try to harm someone in a conflict. That harm may be physical, mental, emotional, or social in nature.

**Defend:** You try to keep someone from harming you, getting past you, or creating an advantage to use against you.

There are also some special effects that some skills perform, such as giving
you additional [stress](../../fate-core/stress-consequences) boxes
for a conflict. See [Physique](../../fate-core/physique) and [Will
](../../fate-core/will) in the default skill list below for examples.

Even though there are only four actions that all skills adhere to, the skill
in question lends context to the action. For example, both Burglary and Crafts
allow you to create an advantage, but only under very different
contexts—Burglary allows you to do it when you’re casing a place you’re about
to break into, and Crafts allows you to do it when you’re examining a piece of
machinery. The different skills let you differentiate the PCs’ abilities from
one another a bit, allowing each person to have a unique contribution to the
game.

## Defining Stunts

A stunt is a special trait your character has that changes the way a skill
works for you. Stunts indicate some special, privileged way a character uses a
skill that is unique to whoever has that stunt, which is a pretty common trope
in a lot of settings—special or elite training, exceptional talents, the mark
of destiny, genetic alteration, innate coolness, and a myriad of other reasons
all explain why some people get more out of their skills than others do.

Unlike skills, which are about the sort of things anyone can do in your
campaign, stunts are about individual characters. For that reason, the next
several pages are about how to make your own stunts, but we’ll also have
example stunts listed under each skill in the [Default Skill List](../../fate-core/default-skill-list "Default Skill List" ).

Having stunts in your game allows you to differentiate characters that have
the same skills as one another.

> Landon and Cynere both have a high Fight skill, but Cynere also has the
Warmaster stunt, which makes her better at creating advantages with the skill.
This differentiates the two characters a great deal—Cynere has a unique
capability to analyze and understand her enemies’ weaknesses in a way Landon
doesn’t.

>

> One might imagine Cynere starting a fight by testing an enemy with moves and
jabs, carefully assessing her opponent’s limits before moving in for a
decisive strike, whereas Landon is happy to wade in and chop away.

You can also use this to set apart a certain set of abilities as belonging to
a dedicated few, if that’s something your setting needs. For example, in a
contemporary setting, you might feel that there shouldn’t be a base skill that
allows just anyone to have medical training. (Unless, of course, it’s a game
about doctors.) However, as a stunt for another, more general knowledge skill
(like Lore), you can have one character be “the doctor” if that’s what the
player wants.

## Stunts and Refresh

Taking a new stunt beyond the first three reduces your character’s refresh
rate by one.

### Stuntmaker—A Tool for Stunt Inspiration

If you're having trouble coming up with a stunt, give the [Stuntmaker](../../stunt-maker/) a go. It will generate random stunts to inspire you!
(Just be sure to vet them with the table before using them.)

  * [« Fate Point Economy](/fate-core/fate-point-economy)
  * [Building Stunts »](/fate-core/building-stunts)

  *[PC]: Player Character

